<h2>THE PERSONS OF THE PLAY</h2>
<ul>
<li><span class="smcap">Aubrey Tanqueray.</span></li>
<li><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></li>
<li><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></li>
<li><span class="smcap">Cayley Drummle.</span></li>
<li><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></li>
<li><span class="smcap">Captain Hugh Ardale.</span></li>
<li><span class="smcap">Gordon Jayne, M.D.</span></li>
<li><span class="smcap">Frank Misquith, Q.C., M.P.</span></li>
<li><span class="smcap">Sir George Orreyed, Bart.</span></li>
<li><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></li>
<li><span class="smcap">Morse.</span></li>
</ul>
<p class="center"><i>The Present Day.</i></p>
<blockquote><p class="hang"><i>The Scene of the First Act is laid at</i> <span class="smcap">Mr. Tanqueray</span>'s <i>rooms, No.
2x, The Albany, in the month of November; the occurrences of the
succeeding Acts take place at his house, "Highercoombe," near
Willowmere, Surrey, during the early part of the following year.</i></p></blockquote>



<!--se:split-->
<h2>THE FIRST ACT</h2>
<blockquote>
<p class="hang"><span class="smcap">Aubrey Tanqueray</span>'s <i>Chambers in the Albany—a richly and tastefully
decorated room, elegantly and luxuriously furnished: on the right a
large pair of doors opening into another room, on the left at the
further end of the room a small door leading to a bedchamber. A
circular table is laid for a dinner for four persons which has now
reached the stage of dessert and coffee. Everything in the apartment
suggests wealth and refinement. The fire is burning brightly.</i></p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_2" name="Page_2">[2]</a></span></p>
<p class="hang"><span class="smcap">Aubrey Tanqueray</span>, <span class="smcap">Misquith</span>, <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Jayne</span> <i>are seated at the
dinner-table.</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>is forty-two, handsome, winning in manner,
his speech and bearing retaining some of the qualities of
young-manhood.</i> <span class="smcap">Misquith</span> <i>is about forty-seven, genial and portly.</i>
<span class="smcap">Jayne</span> <i>is a year or two</i> <span class="smcap">Misquith</span>'s <i>senior; soft-speaking and
precise—in appearance a type of the prosperous town physician.</i>
<span class="smcap">Morse</span>, <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span>'s <i>servant, places a little cabinet of cigars and the
spirit-lamp on the table beside</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span>,
<i>and goes out.</i></p></blockquote>
<div class="medskip"> </div>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>Aubrey, it is a pleasant yet dreadful fact to contemplate, but it's
nearly fifteen years since I first dined with you. You lodged in
Piccadilly in those days, over a hat-shop. Jayne, I met you at that
dinner, and Cayley Drummle.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Yes, yes. What a pity it is that Cayley isn't here to-night.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Confound the old gossip! His empty chair has been staring us in the
face all through dinner. I ought to have told Morse to take it away.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>Odd, his sending no excuse.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_3" name="Page_3">[3]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I'll walk round to his lodgings later on and ask after him.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>I'll go with you.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>So will I.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Opening the cigar-cabinet.</i>] Doctor, it's useless to tempt you, I
know. Frank—[<span class="smcap">Misquith</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>smoke.</i>] I particularly wished
Cayley Drummle to be one of us to-night. You two fellows and Cayley
are my closest, my best friends——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>My dear Aubrey!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>I rejoice to hear you say so.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>And I wanted to see the three of you round this table. You can't
guess the reason.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>You desired to give us a most excellent dinner.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_4" name="Page_4">[4]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Obviously.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Hesitatingly.</i>] Well—I—[<i>glancing at the clock</i>]—Cayley won't
turn up now.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>H'm, hardly.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Then you two shall hear it. Doctor, Frank, this is the last time we
are to meet in these rooms.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>The last time?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>You're going to leave the Albany?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Yes. You've heard me speak of a house I built in the country years
ago, haven't you?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>In Surrey.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Well, when my wife died I cleared out of that house and let it. I
think of trying the place again.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_5" name="Page_5">[5]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>But you'll go raving mad if ever you find yourself down there alone.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Ah, but I sha'n't be alone, and that's what I wanted to tell you.
I'm going to be married.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Going to be married?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>Married?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Yes—to-morrow.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>To-morrow?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>You take my breath away! My dear fellow, I—I—of course, I
congratulate you.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>And—and so do I—heartily.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Thanks—thanks.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>There is a moment or two of embarrassment.</i></p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_6" name="Page_6">[6]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>Er—ah—this is an excellent cigar.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Ah—um—your coffee is remarkable.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Look here; I daresay you two old friends think this treatment very
strange, very unkind. So I want you to understand me. You know a
marriage often cools friendships. What's the usual course of things?
A man's engagement is given out, he is congratulated, complimented
upon his choice; the church is filled with troops of friends, and he
goes away happily to a chorus of good wishes. He comes back, sets up
house in town or country, and thinks to resume the old associations,
the old companionships. My dear Frank, my dear good doctor, it's
very seldom that it can be done. Generally, a worm has begun to eat
its way into those hearty, unreserved, pre-nuptial friendships; a
damnable constraint sets in and acts like a wasting disease; and so,
believe me, in nine cases out of ten a man's marriage severs for him
more close ties than it forms.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>Well, my dear Aubrey, I earnestly hope—<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_7" name="Page_7">[7]</a></span>—</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I know what you're going to say, Frank. I hope so, too. In the
meantime let's face dangers. I've reminded you of the <i>usual</i> course
of things, but my marriage isn't even the conventional sort of
marriage likely to satisfy society. Now, Cayley's a bachelor, but
you two men have wives. By-the-bye, my love to Mrs. Misquith and to
Mrs. Jayne when you get home—don't forget that. Well, your wives
may not—like—the lady I'm going to marry.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Aubrey, forgive me for suggesting that the lady you are going to
marry may not like our wives—mine at least; I beg your pardon,
Frank.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Quite so; then I must go the way my wife goes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>Come, come, pray don't let us anticipate that either side will be
called upon to make such a sacrifice.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Yes, yes, let us anticipate it. And let us make up our minds to have
no slow bleeding-to-death<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_8" name="Page_8">[8]</a></span> of our friendship. We'll end a pleasant
chapter here to-night, and after to-night start afresh. When my wife
and I settle down at Willowmere it's possible that we shall all come
together. But if this isn't to be, for Heaven's sake let us
recognise that it is simply because it can't be, and not wear
hypocritical faces and suffer and be wretched. Doctor,
Frank—[<i>holding out his hands, one to</i> <span class="smcap">Misquith</span>, <i>the other to</i>
<span class="smcap">Jayne</span>]—good luck to all of us!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>But—but—do I understand we are to ask nothing? Not even the lady's
name, Aubrey?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>The lady, my dear Frank, belongs to the next chapter, and in that
her name is Mrs. Aubrey Tanqueray.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Raising his coffee-cup.</i>] Then, in an old-fashioned way, I propose
a toast. Aubrey, Frank, I give you "The Next Chapter!"</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>They drink the toast, saying, "The Next Chapter!"</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Doctor, find a comfortable chair; Frank, you too.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_9" name="Page_9">[9]</a></span> As we're going to
turn out by-and-by, let me scribble a couple of notes now while I
think of them.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Certainly—yes, yes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>It might slip my memory when I get back.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>sits at a writing-table at the other end of the room, and
writes.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Misquith</span>, <i>in a whisper.</i>] Frank—— [<span class="smcap">Misquith</span> <i>quietly leaves
his chair and sits nearer to Jayne.</i>] What is all this? Simply a
morbid crank of Aubrey's with regard to ante-nuptial acquaintances?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>H'm! Did you notice <i>one</i> expression he used?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Let me think——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>"My marriage is not even the conventional sort of marriage likely to
satisfy society."</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Bless me, yes! What does that suggest?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_10" name="Page_10">[10]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>That he has a particular rather than a general reason for
anticipating estrangement from his friends, I'm afraid.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>A horrible <i>mésalliance</i>! A dairymaid who has given him a glass of
milk during a day's hunting, or a little anæmic shopgirl! Frank, I'm
utterly wretched!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>My dear Jayne, speaking in absolute confidence, I have never been
more profoundly depressed in my life.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Morse</span> <i>enters.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Morse.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Announcing</i>] Mr. Drummle.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Cayley Drummle</span> <i>enters briskly. He is a neat little man of about
five-and-forty, in manner bright, airy, debonair, but with an
undercurrent of seriousness.</i></p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Morse</span> <i>retires.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>I'm in disgrace; nobody realises that more thoroughly than I do.
Where's my host?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_11" name="Page_11">[11]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Who has risen.</i>] Cayley.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Shaking hands with him.</i>] Don't speak to me till I have tendered
my explanation. A harsh word from anybody would unman me.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Misquith</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Jayne</span> <i>shake hands with</i> <span class="smcap">Drummle</span>.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Have you dined?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>No—unless you call a bit of fish, a cutlet, and a pancake dining.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Cayley, this is disgraceful.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Fish, a cutlet, and a pancake will require a great deal of
explanation.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>Especially the pancake. My dear friend, your case looks miserably
weak.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Hear me! hear me!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_12" name="Page_12">[12]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Now then!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>Come!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Well!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>It so happens that to-night I was exceptionally early in dressing
for dinner.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>For which dinner—the fish and cutlet?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>For <i>this</i> dinner, of course—really, Frank! At a quarter to eight,
in fact, I found myself trimming my nails, with ten minutes to
spare. Just then enter my man with a note—would I hasten, as fast
as cab could carry me, to old Lady Orreyed in Bruton Street?—"sad
trouble." Now, recollect, please, I had ten minutes on my hands, old
Lady Orreyed was a very dear friend of my mother's, and was in some
distress.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Cayley, come to the fish and cutlet?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_13" name="Page_13">[13]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Jayne</span>.</p>
<p>Yes, yes, and the pancake!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Upon my word! Well, the scene in Bruton Street beggars description;
the women servants looked scared, the men drunk; and there was poor
old Lady Orreyed on the floor of her boudoir like Queen Bess among
her pillows.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>What's the matter?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To everybody.</i>] You know George Orreyed?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>I've met him.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Well, he's a thing of the past.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Not dead!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Certainly, in the worst sense. He's married Mabel Hervey.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_14" name="Page_14">[14]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>What!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>It's true—this morning. The poor mother showed me his letter—a
dozen curt words, and some of those ill-spelt.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Walking up to the fireplace.</i>] I'm very sorry.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Pardon my ignorance—who <i>was</i> Mabel Hervey?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>You don't——? Oh, of course not. Miss Hervey—Lady Orreyed, as she
now is—was a lady who would have been, perhaps has been, described
in the reports of the Police or the Divorce Court as an actress. Had
she belonged to a lower stratum of our advanced civilisation she
would, in the event of judicial inquiry, have defined her calling
with equal justification as that of a dressmaker. To do her justice,
she is a type of a class which is immortal. Physically, by the
strange caprice of creation, curiously beautiful; mentally, she
lacks even the strength of deliberate viciousness. Paint her
portrait, it would symbolise a creature perfectly<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_15" name="Page_15">[15]</a></span> patrician; lance
a vein of her superbly-modelled arm, you would get the poorest <i>vin
ordinaire</i>! Her affections, emotions, impulses, her very
existence—a burlesque! Flaxen, five-and-twenty, and feebly
frolicsome; anybody's, in less gentle society I should say
everybody's, property! That, doctor, was Miss Hervey who is the new
Lady Orreyed. Dost thou like the picture?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>Very good, Cayley! Bravo!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Laying his hand on</i> <span class="smcap">Drummle's</span> <i>shoulder.</i>] You'd scarcely believe
it, Jayne, but none of us really know anything about this lady, our
gay young friend here, I suspect, least of all.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Aubrey, I applaud your chivalry.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>And perhaps you'll let me finish a couple of letters which Frank and
Jayne have given me leave to write. [<i>Returning to the
writing-table.</i>] Ring for what you want, like a good fellow!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>resumes his writing.</i></p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_16" name="Page_16">[16]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Drummle</span>.] Still, the fish and cutlet remain unexplained.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Oh, the poor old woman was so weak that I insisted upon her taking
some food, and felt there was nothing for it but to sit down
opposite her. The fool! the blackguard!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>Poor Orreyed! Well, he's gone under for a time.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>For a time! My dear Frank, I tell you he has absolutely ceased to
be. [<span class="smcap">Aubrey</span>, <i>who has been writing busily, turns his head towards
the speakers and listens. His lips are set, and there is a frown
upon his face.</i>] For all practical purposes you may regard him as
the late George Orreyed. To-morrow the very characteristics of his
speech, as we remember them, will have become obsolete.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>But surely, in the course of years, he and his wife will outlive——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>No, no, doctor, don't try to upset one of my settled<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_17" name="Page_17">[17]</a></span> beliefs. You
may dive into many waters, but there is <i>one</i> social Dead Sea——!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Perhaps you're right.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Right! Good God! I wish you could prove me otherwise! Why, for years
I've been sitting, and watching and waiting.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>You're in form to-night, Cayley. May we ask where you've been in the
habit of squandering your useful leisure?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Where? On the shore of that same sea.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>And, pray, what have you been waiting for?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>For some of my best friends <i>to come up</i>. [<span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>utters a
half-stifled exclamation of impatience; then he hurriedly gathers up
his papers from the writing-table. The three men turn to him.</i>] Eh?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_18" name="Page_18">[18]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Oh, I—I'll finish my letters in the other room if you'll excuse me
for five minutes. Tell Cayley the news.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He goes out.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Hurrying to the door.</i>] My dear fellow, my jabbering has disturbed
you! I'll never talk again as long as I live!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>Close the door, Cayley.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Drummle</span> <i>shuts the door.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Cayley——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Advancing to the dinner table.</i>] A smoke, a smoke, or I perish!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>Selects a cigar from the little cabinet.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Cayley, marriages are in the air.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Are they? Discover the bacillus, doctor, and destroy it.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>I mean, among our friends.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_19" name="Page_19">[19]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Oh, Nugent Warrinder's engagement to Lady Alice Tring. I've heard of
that. They're not to be married till the spring.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Another marriage that concerns us a little takes place to-morrow.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Whose marriage?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Aubrey's.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Aub——! [<i>Looking towards</i> <span class="smcap">Misquith</span>.] Is it a joke?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>No.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Looking from</i> <span class="smcap">Misquith</span> <i>to</i> <span class="smcap">Jayne</span>.] To whom?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>He doesn't tell us.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>We three were asked here to-night to receive the announcement.
Aubrey has some theory that marriage is likely to alienate a man
from his friends,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_20" name="Page_20">[20]</a></span> and it seems to me he has taken the precaution to
wish us good-bye.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>No, no.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Practically, surely.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Thoughtfully.</i>] Marriage in general, does he mean, or this
marriage?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>That's the point. Frank says——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>No, no, no; I feared it suggested——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Well, well. [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Drummle</span>.] What do you think Of it?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>After a slight pause.</i>] Is there a light there? [<i>Lighting his
cigar.</i>] He—wraps the lady—in mystery—you say?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>Most modestly.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_21" name="Page_21">[21]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Aubrey's—not—a very—young man.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Forty-three.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Ah! <i>L'age critique!</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>A dangerous age—yes, yes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>When you two fellows go home, do you mind leaving me behind here?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>Not at all.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>By all means.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>All right. [<i>Anxiously.</i>] Deuce take it, the man's second marriage
mustn't be another mistake!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>With his head bent he walks up to the fireplace.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>You knew him in his short married life, Cayley. Terribly
unsatisfactory, wasn't it?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_22" name="Page_22">[22]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Well—— [<i>Looking at the door.</i>] I quite closed that door?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>Settles himself on the sofa</i>; <span class="smcap">Jayne</span> <i>is seated in an armchair.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Smoking, with his back to the fire.</i>] He married a Miss Herriott;
that was in the year eighteen—confound dates—twenty years ago. She
was a lovely creature—by Jove, she was; by religion a Roman
Catholic. She was one of your cold sort, you know—all marble arms
and black velvet. I remember her with painful distinctness as the
only woman who ever made me nervous.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>Ha, ha!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>He loved her—to distraction, as they say. Jupiter, how fervently
that poor devil courted her! But I don't believe she allowed him
even to squeeze her fingers. She <i>was</i> an iceberg! As for kissing,
the mere contact would have given him chapped lips. However, he
married her and took her away, the latter greatly to my relief.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_23" name="Page_23">[23]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Abroad, you mean?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Eh? Yes. I imagine he gratified her by renting a villa in Lapland,
but I don't know. After a while they returned, and then I saw how
wofully Aubrey had miscalculated results.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Miscalculated——?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>He had reckoned, poor wretch, that in the early days of marriage she
would thaw. But she didn't. I used to picture him closing his doors
and making up the fire in the hope of seeing her features relax.
Bless her, the thaw never set in! I believe she kept a thermometer
in her stays and always registered ten degrees below zero. However,
in time a child came—a daughter.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Didn't that——?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Not a bit of it; it made matters worse. Frightened at her failure to
stir up in him some sympathetic religious belief, she determined
upon strong measures<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_24" name="Page_24">[24]</a></span> with regard to the child. He opposed her for a
miserable year or so, but she wore him down, and the insensible
little brat was placed in a convent, first in France, then in
Ireland. Not long afterwards the mother died, strangely enough, of
fever, the only warmth, I believe, that ever came to that woman's
body.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>Don't, Cayley!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>The child is living, we know.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Yes, if you choose to call it living. Miss Tanqueray—a young woman
of nineteen now—is in the Loretto convent at Armagh. She professes
to have found her true vocation in a religious life, and within a
month or two will take final vows.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>He ought to have removed his daughter from the convent when the
mother died.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Yes, yes, but absolutely at the end there was reconciliation between
husband and wife, and she<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_25" name="Page_25">[25]</a></span> won his promise that the child should
complete her conventual education. He reaped his reward. When he
attempted to gain his girl's confidence and affection he was too
late; he found he was dealing with the spirit of the mother. You
remember his visit to Ireland last month?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>That was to wish his girl good-bye.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>Poor fellow?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>He sent for me when he came back. I think he must have had a
lingering hope that the girl would relent—would come to life, as it
were—at the last moment, for, for an hour or so, in this room, he
was terribly shaken. I'm sure he'd clung to that hope from the
persistent way in which he kept breaking off in his talk to repeat
one dismal word, as if he couldn't realise his position without
dinning this damned word into his head.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>What word was that?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_26" name="Page_26">[26]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Alone—alone.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>enters.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>A thousand apologies!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Gaily.</i>] We are talking about you, my dear Aubrey.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>During the telling of the story,</i> <span class="smcap">Misquith</span> <i>has risen and gone to
the fire, and</i> <span class="smcap">Drummle</span> <i>has thrown himself full-length on the sofa.</i>
<span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>now joins</i> <span class="smcap">Misquith</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Jayne</span>.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Well, Cayley, are you surprised?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Surp——! I haven't been surprised for twenty years.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>And you're not angry with me?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Angry! [<i>Rising.</i>] Because you considerately withhold<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_27" name="Page_27">[27]</a></span> the name of a
lady with whom it is now the object of my life to become acquainted?
My dear fellow, you pique my curiosity, you give zest to my
existence! And as for a wedding, who on earth wants to attend that
familiar and probably draughty function? Ugh! My cigar's out.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Let's talk about something else.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Looking at his watch.</i>] Not to-night, Aubrey.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>My dear Frank!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>I go up to Scotland to-morrow, and there are some little matters——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>I am off too.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>No, no.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>I must: I have to give a look to a case in Clifford Street on my way
home.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_28" name="Page_28">[28]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Going to the door.</i>] Well! [<span class="smcap">Misquith</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Jayne</span> <i>exchange looks
with</i> <span class="smcap">Drummle</span>. <i>Opening the door and calling.</i>] Morse, hats and
coats! I shall write to you all next week from Genoa or Florence.
Now, doctor, Frank, remember, my love to Mrs. Misquith and to Mrs.
Jayne!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Morse</span> <i>enters with hats and coats.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Jayne</span>.</p>
<p>Yes, yes—yes, yes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>And your young people!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>As</i> <span class="smcap">Misquith</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Jayne</span> <i>put on their coats there is the clatter
of careless talk.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>Cayley, I meet you at dinner on Sunday.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>At the Stratfields'. That's very pleasant.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Putting on his coat with</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span>'s <i>aid.</i>] Ah-h!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>What's wrong?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_29" name="Page_29">[29]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>A twinge. Why didn't I go to Aix in August?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Shaking hands with</i> <span class="smcap">Drummle</span>.] Good-night, Cayley.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Good-night, my dear doctor!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Shaking hands with</i> <span class="smcap">Drummle</span>.] Cayley, are you in town for long?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Dear friend, I'm nowhere for long. Good-night.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>Good-night.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Aubrey</span>, <span class="smcap">Jayne</span>, <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Misquith</span> <i>go out, followed by</i> <span class="smcap">Morse</span>; <i>the hum
of talk is continued outside.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>A cigar, Frank?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>No, thank you.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Going to walk, doctor?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_30" name="Page_30">[30]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Jayne.</span></p>
<p>If Frank will.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Misquith.</span></p>
<p>By all means.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>It's a cold night.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>The door is closed.</i> <span class="smcap">Drummle</span> <i>remains standing with his coat on
his arm and his hat in his hand.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To himself, thoughtfully.</i>] Now then! What the devil——!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Aubrey</span>
<i>returns.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Eyeing</i> <span class="smcap">Drummle</span> <i>a little awkwardly.</i>] Well, Cayley?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Well, Aubrey?</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>walks up to the fire and stands looking into it.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>You're not going, old chap?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Sitting.</i>] No.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>After a slight pause, with a forced laugh.</i>] Hah!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_31" name="Page_31">[31]</a></span> Cayley, I never
thought I should feel—shy—with you.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Why do you?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Never mind.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Now, I can quite understand a man wishing to be married in the dark,
as it were.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>You can?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>In your place I should very likely adopt the same course.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>You think so?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>And if I intended marrying a lady not prominently in Society, as I
presume you do—as I presume you do——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Well?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>As I presume you do, I'm not sure that <i>I</i> should tender her for
preliminary dissection at afternoon tea-tables.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_32" name="Page_32">[32]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>No?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>In fact, there is probably only one person—were I in your position
to-night—with whom I should care to chat the matter over.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Who's that?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Yourself, of course. [<i>Going to</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>and standing beside him.</i>]
Of course, yourself, old friend.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>After a pause.</i>] I must seem a brute to you, Cayley. But there are
some acts which are hard to explain, hard to defend——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>To defend——?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Some acts which one must trust to time to put right.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Drummle</span> <i>watches him for a moment, then takes up his hat and coat.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Well, I'll be moving.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_33" name="Page_33">[33]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Cayley! Confound you and your old friendship! Do you think I forget
it? Put your coat down! Why did you stay behind here? Cayley, the
lady I am going to marry is the lady—who is known as—Mrs. Jarman.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>There is a pause.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>In a low voice</i>] Mrs. Jarman! are you serious?</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He walks up to the fireplace, where he leans upon the mantelpiece
uttering something like a groan.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>As you've got this out of me I give you leave to say all you care to
say. Come, we'll be plain with each other. You know Mrs. Jarman?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>I first met her at—what does it matter?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Yes, yes, everything! Come!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>I met her at Homburg, two—three seasons ago.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_34" name="Page_34">[34]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Not as Mrs. Jarman?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>No.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>She was then——?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Mrs. Dartry.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Yes. She has also seen you in London, she says.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Certainly.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>In Aldford Street. Go on.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Please!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I insist.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>With a slight shrug of the shoulders.</i>] Some time last year I was
asked by a man to sup at his house, one night after the theatre.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Mr. Selwyn Ethurst—a bachelor.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_35" name="Page_35">[35]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>You were surprised therefore to find Mr. Ethurst aided in his cursed
hospitality by a lady.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>I was unprepared.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>The lady you had known as Mrs. Dartry? [<span class="smcap">Drummle</span> <i>inclines his head
silently.</i>] There is something of a yachting cruise in the
Mediterranean too, is there not?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>I joined Peter Jarman's yacht at Marseilles, in the Spring, a month
before he died.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Mrs. Jarman was on board?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>She was a kind hostess.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>And an old acquaintance?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Yes.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_36" name="Page_36">[36]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>You have told your story.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>With your assistance.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I have put you to the pain of telling it to show you that this is
not the case of a blind man entrapped by an artful woman. Let me add
that Mrs. Jarman has no legal right to that name, that she is simply
Miss Ray—Miss Paula Ray.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>After a pause.</i>] I should like to express my regret, Aubrey, for
the way in which I spoke of George Orreyed's marriage.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>You mean you compare Lady Orreyed with Miss Ray? [<span class="smcap">Drummle</span> <i>is
silent.</i>] Oh, of course! To you, Cayley, all women who have been
roughly treated, and who dare to survive by borrowing a little of
our philosophy, are alike. You see in the crowd of the Ill-used only
one pattern; you can't detect the shades of goodness, intelligence,
even nobility there.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_37" name="Page_37">[37]</a></span> Well, how should you? The crowd is dimly
lighted! And, besides, yours is the way of the world.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>My dear Aubrey, I <i>live</i> in the world.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>The name we give our little parish of St. James's.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Laying a hand on</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span>'s <i>shoulder.</i>] And you are quite
prepared, my friend, to forfeit the esteem of your little parish?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I avoid mortification by shifting from one parish to another. I give
up Pall Mall for the Surrey hills; leave off varnishing my boots and
double the thickness of the soles.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>And your skin—do you double the thickness of that also?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I know you think me a fool, Cayley—you needn't infer that I'm a
coward into the bargain. No! I know what I'm doing, and I do it
deliberately, defiantly. I'm alone; I injure no living soul by the<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_38" name="Page_38">[38]</a></span>
step I'm going to take; and so you can't urge the one argument which
might restrain me. Of course, I don't expect you to think
compassionately, fairly even, of the woman whom I—whom I am drawn
to——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>My dear Aubrey, I assure you I consider Mrs.—Miss Jarman—Mrs.
Ray—Miss Ray—delightful. But I confess there is a form of chivalry
which I gravely distrust, especially in a man of—our age.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Thanks. I've heard you say that from forty till fifty a man is at
heart either a stoic or a satyr.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Protestingly.</i>] Ah! now——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I am neither. I have a temperate, honourable affection for Mrs.
Jarman. She has never met a man who has treated her well—I intend
to treat her well. That's all. And in a few years, Cayley, if you've
not quite forsaken me, I'll prove to you that it's possible to rear
a life of happiness, of good repute, on a—miserable foundation.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_39" name="Page_39">[39]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Offering his hand.</i>] Do prove it!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Taking his hand.</i>] We have spoken too freely of—of Mrs. Jarman. I
was excited—angry. Please forget it!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>My dear Aubrey, when we next meet I shall remember nothing but my
respect for the lady who bears your name.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Morse</span> <i>enters, closing the door behind him carefully.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>What is it?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Morse.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Hesitatingly.</i>] May I speak to you, Sir? [<i>In an undertone.</i>] Mrs.
Jarman, sir.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Softly to</i> <span class="smcap">Morse</span>.] Mrs. Jarman! Do you mean she is at the lodge in
her carriage?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Morse.</span></p>
<p>No, sir—here. [<span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>looks towards</i> <span class="smcap">Drummle</span>, <i>perplexed.</i>]
There's a nice fire in your—in that room,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_40" name="Page_40">[40]</a></span> sir. [<i>Glancing in the
direction of the door leading to the bedroom.</i>]</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Between his teeth, angrily.</i>] Very well.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Morse</span> <i>retires.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Looking at his watch.</i>] A quarter to eleven—horrible! [<i>Taking up
his hat and coat.</i>] Must get to bed—up late every night this week.
[<span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>assists</i> <span class="smcap">Drummle</span> <i>with his coat.</i>] Thank you. Well,
good-night, Aubrey. I feel I've been dooced serious, quite out of
keeping with myself; pray overlook it.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Kindly.</i>] Ah, Cayley!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Putting on a neck-handkerchief.</i>] And remember that, after all,
I'm merely a spectator in life; nothing more than a man at a play,
in fact; only, like the old-fashioned playgoer, I love to see
certain characters happy and comfortable at the finish. You
understand?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I think I do.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_41" name="Page_41">[41]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Then, for as long as you can, old friend, will you—keep a stall for
me?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Yes, Cayley.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Gaily.</i>] Ah, ha! Good-night! [<i>Bustling to the door.</i>] Don't
bother! I'll let myself out! Good-night! God bless yer!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He goes out</i>; <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>follows him.</i> <span class="smcap">Morse</span> <i>enters by the other
door, carrying some unopened letters which after a little
consideration he places on the mantelpiece against the clock.</i>
<span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>returns.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Yes?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Morse.</span></p>
<p>You hadn't seen your letters that came by the nine o'clock post,
sir; I've put 'em where they'll catch your eye by-and-by.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Thank you.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Morse.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Hesitatingly.</i>] Gunter's cook and waiter have gone, sir. Would you
prefer me to go to bed?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_42" name="Page_42">[42]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Frowning.</i>] Certainly not.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Morse.</span></p>
<p>Very well, sir.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He goes out.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Opening the upper door</i>] Paula! Paula!</p>
<blockquote>
<p class="hang"><span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>enters and throws her arms round his neck. She is a young
woman of about twenty-seven: beautiful, fresh, innocent-looking. She
is in superb evening dress.</i></p></blockquote>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Dearest!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Why have you come here?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Angry?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Yes—no. But it's eleven o'clock.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Laughing.</i>] I know.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>What on earth will Morse think?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_43" name="Page_43">[43]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Do you trouble yourself about what servants <i>think</i>?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Of course.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Goose! They're only machines made to wait upon people—and to give
evidence in the Divorce Court. [<i>Looking round.</i>] Oh, indeed! A snug
little dinner!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Three men.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Suspiciously.</i>] Men?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Men.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Penitently.</i>] Ah! [<i>Sitting at the table.</i>] I'm so hungry.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Let me get you some game pie, or some——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>No, no, hungry for this. What beautiful fruit! I love fruit when
it's expensive. [<i>He clears a space on the table, places a plate
before her, and helps her to fruit.</i>] I haven't dined, Aubrey dear.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_44" name="Page_44">[44]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>My poor girl! Why?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>In the first place, I forgot to order any dinner, and my cook, who
has always loathed me, thought he'd pay me out before he departed.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>The beast!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>That's precisely what I——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>No, Paula!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>What I told my maid to call him. What next will you think of me?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Forgive me. You must be starved.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Eating fruit.</i>] <i>I</i> didn't care. As there was nothing to eat, I
sat in my best frock, with my toes on the dining-room fender, and
dreamt, oh, such a lovely dinner-party.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_45" name="Page_45">[45]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Dear lonely little woman!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>It was perfect. I saw you at the end of a very long table, opposite
me, and we exchanged sly glances now and again over the flowers. We
were host and hostess, Aubrey, and had been married about five
years.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Kissing her hand.</i>] Five years.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>And on each side of us was the nicest set imaginable—you know,
dearest, the sort of men and women that can't be imitated.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Yes, yes. Eat some more fruit.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>But I haven't told you the best part of my dream.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Tell me.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Well, although we had been married only such a<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_46" name="Page_46">[46]</a></span> few years, I seemed
to know by the look on their faces that none of our guests had ever
heard anything—anything—anything peculiar about the fascinating
hostess.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>That's just how it will be, Paula. The world moves so quickly.
That's just how it will be.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>With a little grimace.</i>] I wonder! [<i>Glancing at the fire.</i>] Ugh!
do throw another log on.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Mending the fire.</i>] There. But you mustn't be here long.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Hospitable wretch! I've something important to tell you. No, stay
where you are. [<i>Turning from him, her face averted.</i>] Look here,
that was my dream, Aubrey; but the fire went out while I was dozing,
and I woke up with a regular fit of the shivers. And the result of
it all was that I ran upstairs and scribbled you a letter.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Dear baby!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_47" name="Page_47">[47]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Remain where you are. [<i>Taking a letter from her pocket.</i>] This is
it. I've given you an account of myself, furnished you with a list
of my adventures since I—you know. [<i>Weighing the letter in her
hand.</i>] I wonder if it would go for a penny. Most of it you're
acquainted with; <i>I've</i> told you a good deal, haven't I?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Oh, Paula!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>What I haven't told you I daresay you've heard from others. But in
case they've omitted anything—the dears—it's all here.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>In Heaven's name, why must you talk like this to-night?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>It may save discussion by-and-by, don't you think? [<i>Holding out the
letter.</i>] There you are.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>No, dear, no.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Take it. [<i>He takes the letter.</i>] Read it through<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_48" name="Page_48">[48]</a></span> after I've gone,
and then—read it again, and turn the matter over in your mind
finally. And if, even at the very last moment, you feel
you—oughtn't to go to church with me, send a messenger to Pont
Street, any time before eleven to-morrow, telling me that you're
afraid, and I—I'll take the blow.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Why, what—what do you think I am?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>That's it. It's because I know you're such a dear good fellow that I
want to save you the chance of ever feeling sorry you married me. I
really love you so much, Aubrey, that to save you that I'd rather
you treated me as—as the others have done.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Turning from her with a cry.</i>] Oh!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>After a slight pause.</i>] I suppose I've shocked you. I can't help
it if I have.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>She sits, with assumed languor and indifference. He turns to her,
advances, and kneels by her.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>My dearest, you don't understand me. I—I can't<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_49" name="Page_49">[49]</a></span> bear to hear you
always talking about—what's done with. I tell you I'll never
remember it; Paula, can't you dismiss it? Try. Darling, if we
promise each other to forget, to forget, we're bound to be happy.
After all, it's a mechanical matter; the moment a wretched thought
enters your head, you quickly think of something bright—it depends
on one's will. Shall I burn this, dear? [<i>Referring to the letter he
holds in his hand.</i>] Let me, let me!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>With a shrug of the shoulders.</i>] I don't suppose there's much
that's new to you in it—just as you like.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He goes to the fire and
burns the letter.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>There's an end of it. [<i>Returning to her.</i>] What's the matter?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Rising, coldly.</i>] Oh, nothing! I'll go and put my cloak on.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Detaining her.</i>] What <i>is</i> the matter?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Well, I think you might have said, "You're very<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_50" name="Page_50">[50]</a></span> generous, Paula,"
or at least, "Thank you, dear," when I offered to set you free.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Catching her in his arms.</i>] Ah!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Ah! ah! Ha, ha! It's all very well, but you don't know what it cost
me to make such an offer. I do so want to be married.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>But you never imagined——?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Perhaps not. And yet I <i>did</i> think of what I'd do at the end of our
acquaintance if you had preferred to behave like the rest.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>Taking a flower from her bodice.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Hush!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh, I forgot!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>What would you have done when we parted?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Why, killed myself.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_51" name="Page_51">[51]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Paula, dear!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>It's true. [<i>Putting the flower in his buttonhole.</i>] Do you know I
feel certain I should make away with myself if anything serious
happened to me.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Anything serious! What, has nothing ever been serious to you, Paula?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Not lately; not since a long while ago. I made up my mind then to
have done with taking things seriously. If I hadn't, I—— However,
we won't talk about that.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>But now, now, life will be different to you, won't it—quite
different? Eh, dear?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh yes, now. Only, Aubrey, mind you keep me always happy.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I will try to.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I know I couldn't swallow a second big dose of<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_52" name="Page_52">[52]</a></span> misery. I know that
if ever I felt wretched again—truly wretched—I should take a leaf
out of Connie Tirlemont's book. You remember? They found her——
[<i>With a look of horror.</i>]</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>For God's sake, don't let your thoughts run on such things!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Laughing.</i>] Ha, ha, how scared you look! There, think of the time!
Dearest, what will my coachman say! My cloak!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>She runs off, gaily, by the upper door.</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>looks after her
for a moment, then he walks up to the fire and stands warming his
feet at the bars. As he does so he raises his head and observes the
letters upon the mantelpiece. He takes one down quickly.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Ah! Ellean! [<i>Opening the letter and reading.</i>] "My dear father,—A
great change has come over me. I believe my mother in Heaven has
spoken to me, and counselled me to turn to you in your loneliness.
At any rate, your words have reached my heart, and I no longer feel
fitted for this solemn life.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_53" name="Page_53">[53]</a></span> I am ready to take my place by you.
Dear father, will you receive me?—<span class="smcap">Ellean.</span>"</p>
<blockquote>
<p class="hang"><span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>re-enters, dressed in a handsome cloak. He stares at her as
if he hardly realised her presence.</i></p></blockquote>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>What are you staring at? Don't you admire my cloak?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Couldn't you wait till I'd gone before reading your letters?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Putting the letter away.</i>] I beg your pardon.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Take me downstairs to the carriage. [<i>Slipping her arm through
his.</i>] How I tease you! To-morrow! I'm so happy!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>They go out.</i></p>

<!--se:split-->
<h2>THE SECOND ACT</h2>
<blockquote>
<p class="hang"><i>A morning-room in</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey Tanqueray's</span> <i>house, "Highercoombe," near
Willowmere, Surrey—a bright and prettily furnished apartment of
irregular shape, with double doors opening into a small hall at the
back, another door on the left, and a large recessed window through
which is obtained a view of extensive grounds. Everything about the
room is charming and graceful. The fire is burning in the grate, and
a small table is tastefully laid for breakfast. It is a morning in
early Spring, and the sun is streaming in through the window.</i></p>
<p class="hang"><span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>are seated at breakfast, and</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>is
silently reading his letters. Two servants, a man and a woman, hand
dishes and then retire. After a little while</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>puts his
letters aside and looks across to the window.</i></p></blockquote>
<div class="medskip"> </div>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_55" name="Page_55">[55]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Sunshine! Spring!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Glancing at the clock.</i>] Exactly six minutes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Six minutes?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Six minutes, Aubrey dear, since you made your last remark.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I beg your pardon; I was reading my letters. Have you seen Ellean
this morning?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Coldly.</i>] Your last observation but one was about Ellean.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Dearest, what shall I talk about?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Ellean breakfasted two hours ago, Morgan tells me, and then went out
walking with her dog.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_56" name="Page_56">[56]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>She wraps up warmly, I hope; this sunshine is deceptive.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I ran about the lawn last night, after dinner, in satin shoes. Were
you anxious about me?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Certainly.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Melting.</i>] Really?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>You make me wretchedly anxious; you delight in doing incautious
things. You are incurable.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Ah, what a beast I am! [<i>Going to him and kissing him, then glancing
at the letters by his side.</i>] A letter from Cayley?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>He is staying very near here, with Mrs.—— Very near here.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>With the lady whose chimneys we have the honour of contemplating
from our windows?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_57" name="Page_57">[57]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>With Mrs. Cortelyon—yes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Mrs. Cortelyon! The woman who might have set the example of calling
on me when we first threw out roots in this deadly-lively soil!
Deuce take Mrs. Cortelyon!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Hush! my dear girl!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Returning to her seat.</i>] Oh, I know she's an old acquaintance of
yours—and of the first Mrs. Tanqueray. And she joins the rest of
'em in slapping the second Mrs. Tanqueray in the face. However, I
have my revenge—she's six-and-forty, and I wish nothing worse to
happen to any woman.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Well, she's going to town, Cayley says here, and his visit's at an
end. He's coming over this morning to call on you. Shall we ask him
to transfer himself to us? Do say yes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Yes.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_58" name="Page_58">[58]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Gladly.</i>] Ah, ha! old Cayley!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Coldly.</i>] He'll amuse <i>you</i>.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>And you too.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Because you find a companion, shall I be boisterously hilarious?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Come, come! He talks London, and you know you like that.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>London! London or Heaven! which is farther from me!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Paula!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh! Oh, I am so bored, Aubrey!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Gathering up his letters and going to her, leaning over her
shoulder.</i>] Baby, what can I do for you?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_59" name="Page_59">[59]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I suppose, nothing. You have done all you can for me.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>What do you mean?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>You have married me.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He walks away from her thoughtfully, to the writing-table. As he
places his letters on the table he sees an addressed letter, stamped
for the post, lying on the blotting-book; he picks it up.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>In an altered tone.</i>] You've been writing this Morning before
breakfast?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Looking at him quickly, then away again.</i>] Er—that letter.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>With the letter in his hand.</i>] To Lady Orreyed. Why?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Why not? Mabel's an old friend of mine.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_60" name="Page_60">[60]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Are you—corresponding?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I heard from her yesterday. They've just returned from the Riviera.
She seems happy.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Sarcastically.</i>] That's good news.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Why are you always so cutting about Mabel? She's a kind-hearted
girl. Every thing's altered; she even thinks of letting her hair go
back to brown. She's Lady Orreyed. She's married to George. What's
the matter with her?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Turning away.</i>] Oh!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>You drive me mad sometimes with the tone you take about things!
Great goodness, if you come to that, George Orreyed's wife isn't a
bit worse than yours! [<i>He faces her suddenly.</i>] I suppose I needn't
have made that observation.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_61" name="Page_61">[61]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>No, there was scarcely a necessity.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He throws the letter on to the table, and takes up the newspaper.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I am very sorry.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>All right, dear.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Trifling with the letter.</i>] I—I'd better tell you what I've
written. I meant to do so, of course. I—I've asked the Orreyeds to
come and stay with us. [<i>He looks at her and lets the paper fall to
the ground in a helpless way.</i>] George was a great friend of
Cayley's; I'm sure <i>he</i> would be delighted to meet them here.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Laughing mirthlessly.</i>] Ha, ha, ha! They say Orreyed has taken to
tippling at dinner. Heavens above!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh! I've no patience with you! You'll kill me with this life! [<i>She
selects some flowers from a vase on the table, cuts and arranges
them, and fastens them in her bodice.</i>] What is my existence, Sunday
to<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_62" name="Page_62">[62]</a></span> Saturday? In the morning, a drive down to the village, with the
groom, to give my orders to the tradespeople. At lunch, you and
Ellean. In the afternoon, a novel, the newspapers; if fine, another
drive—<i>if</i> fine! Tea—you and Ellean. Then two hours of dusk; then
dinner—you and Ellean. Then a game of Bésique, you and I, while
Ellean reads a religious book in a dull corner. Then a yawn from me,
another from you, a sigh from Ellean; three figures suddenly
rise—"Good-night, good-night, good-night!" [<i>Imitating a kiss.</i>]
"God bless you!" Ah!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Yes, yes, Paula—yes, dearest—that's what it is <i>now</i>. But,
by-and-by, if people begin to come round us——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Hah! That's where we've made the mistake, my friend Aubrey!
[<i>Pointing to the window.</i>] Do you believe these people will <i>ever</i>
come round us? Your former crony, Mrs. Cortelyon? Or the grim old
vicar, or that wife of his whose huge nose is positively indecent?
Or the Ullathornes, or the Gollans, or Lady William Petres? I know
better! And when the young ones gradually take the place of the old,
there will still remain the sacred tradition that the dreadful
person who lives at the top of the hill is<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_63" name="Page_63">[63]</a></span> never, under any
circumstances, to be called upon! And so we shall go on here, year
in and year out, until the sap is run out of our lives, and we're
stale and dry and withered from sheer, solitary respectability. Upon
my word, I wonder we didn't see that we should have been far happier
if we'd gone in for the devil-may-care, <i>café</i>-living sort of life
in town! After all, <i>I</i> have a set and you might have joined it.
It's true I did want, dearly, dearly, to be a married woman, but
where's the pride in being a married woman among married women who
are—married! If—— [<i>Seeing that</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey's</span> <i>head has sunk into his
hands.</i>] Aubrey! My dear boy! You're not—crying?</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He looks up, with a flushed face.</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>enters, dressed very
simply for walking. She is a low voiced, grave girl of about
nineteen, with a face somewhat resembling a Madonna. Towards</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span>
<i>her manner is cold and distant.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>In an undertone.</i>] Ellean!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Good-morning, papa. Good-morning, Paula.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>puts her arms round</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>and kisses her.</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>makes
little response.</i></p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_64" name="Page_64">[64]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Good-morning. [<i>Brightly.</i>] We've been breakfasting this side of the
house, to get the sun.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>She sits at the piano and rattles at a gay melody. Seeing that</i>
<span class="smcap">Paula's</span> <i>back is turned to them,</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>goes to</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>and
kisses him; he returns the kiss almost furtively. As they separate,
the servants re-enter, and proceed to carry out the
breakfast-table.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span>.] I guess where you've been: there's some gorse
clinging to your frock.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Removing a sprig of gorse from her skirt.</i>] Rover and I walked
nearly as far as Black Moor. The poor fellow has a thorn in his pad;
I am going upstairs for my tweezers.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Ellean! [<i>She returns to him.</i>] Paula is a little depressed—out of
sorts. She complains that she has no companion.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_65" name="Page_65">[65]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>I am with Paula nearly all the day, papa.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Ah, but you're such a little mouse. Paula likes cheerful people
about her.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>I'm afraid I am naturally rather silent; and it's so difficult to
seem to be what one is not.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I don't wish that, Ellean.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>I will offer to go down to the village with Paula this
morning—shall I?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Touching her hand gently.</i>] Thank you—do.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>When I've looked after Rover, I'll come back to her.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>She goes out;</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>ceases playing, and turns on the music-stool
looking at</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span>.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_66" name="Page_66">[66]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Well, have you and Ellean had your little confidence?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Confidence?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Do you think I couldn't feel it, like a pain between my shoulders?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Ellean is coming back in a few minutes to be with you. [<i>Bending
over her.</i>] Paula, Paula dear, is this how you keep your promise?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh! [<i>Rising impatiently and crossing swiftly to the settee, where
she sits, moving restlessly.</i>] I <i>can't</i> keep my promise; I <i>am</i>
jealous; it won't be smothered. I see you looking at her, watching
her; your voice drops when you speak to her. I know how fond you are
of that girl, Aubrey.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>What would you have? I've no other home for her. She is my
daughter.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_67" name="Page_67">[67]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>She is your saint. Saint Ellean!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>You have often told me how good and sweet you think her.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Good!—yes! Do you imagine <i>that</i> makes me less jealous? [<i>Going to
him and clinging to his arm.</i>] Aubrey, there are two sorts of
affection—the love for a woman you respect, and the love for a
woman you—love. She gets the first from you: I never can.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Hush, hush! you don't realise what you say.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>If Ellean cared for me only a little, it would be different. I
shouldn't be jealous then. Why doesn't she care for me?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>She—she—she will, in time.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>You can't say that without stuttering.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_68" name="Page_68">[68]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Her disposition seems a little unresponsive; she resembles her
mother in many ways; I can see it every day.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>She's marble. It's a shame. There's not the slightest excuse; for
all she knows, I'm as much a saint as she—only married. Dearest,
help me to win her over!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Help you?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>You can. Teach her that it is her duty to love me; she hangs on to
every word you speak. I'm sure, Aubrey, that the love of a nice
woman who believed me to be like herself would do me a world of
good. You'd get the benefit of it as well as I. It would soothe me;
it would make me less horribly restless; it would take
this—this—mischievous feeling from me. [<i>Coaxingly.</i>] Aubrey!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Have patience; everything will come right.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Yes, if you help me.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_69" name="Page_69">[69]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>In the meantime you will tear up your letter to Lady Orreyed, won't
you?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Kissing his hand.</i>] Of course I will—anything!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Ah, thank you, dearest! [<i>Laughing.</i>] Why, good gracious!—ha,
ha!—just imagine "Saint Ellean" and that woman side by side!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Going back with a cry.</i>] Ah!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>What?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Passionately.</i>] It's Ellean you're considering, not me? It's all
Ellean with you! Ellean! Ellean!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>re-enters.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Did you call me, Paula? [<i>Clenching his hands,</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>turns away
and goes out.</i>] Is papa angry?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_70" name="Page_70">[70]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I drive him distracted sometimes. There, I confess it!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Do you? Oh, why do you?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Because I—because I'm jealous.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Jealous?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Yes—of you. [<span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>is silent.</i>] Well, what do you think of that?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>I knew it; I've seen it. It hurts me dreadfully. What do you wish me
to do? Go away?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Leave us! [<i>Beckoning her with a motion of the head.</i>] Look here!
[<span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>goes to</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>slowly and unresponsively.</i>] You could cure
me of my jealousy very easily. Why don't you—like me?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>What do you mean by—like you? I don't understand.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_71" name="Page_71">[71]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Love me.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Love is not a feeling that is under one's control. I shall alter as
time goes on, perhaps. I didn't begin to love my father deeply till
a few months ago, and then I obeyed my mother.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Ah, yes, you dream things, don't you—see them in your sleep? You
fancy your mother speaks to you?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>When you have lost your mother it is a comfort to believe that she
is dead only to this life, that she still watches over her child. I
do believe that of my mother.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Well, and so you haven't been bidden to love <i>me</i>?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>[<i>After a pause, almost inaudibly.</i>] No.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Dreams are only a hash-up of one's day-thoughts, I suppose you know.
Think intently of anything, and it's bound to come back to you at
night. I don't cultivate dreams myself.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_72" name="Page_72">[72]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Ah, I knew you would only sneer!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I'm not sneering; I'm speaking the truth. I say that if you cared
for me in the daytime I should soon make friends with those
nightmares of yours. Ellean, why don't you try to look on me as your
second mother? Of course there are not many years between us, but
I'm ever so much older than you—in experience. I shall have no
children of my own, I know that; it would be a real comfort to me if
you would make me feel we belonged to each other. Won't you? Perhaps
you think I'm odd—not nice. Well, the fact is I've two sides to my
nature, and I've let the one almost smother the other. A few years
ago I went through some trouble, and since then I haven't shed a
tear. I believe if you put your arms round me just once I should run
upstairs and have a good cry. There, I've talked to you as I've
never talked to a woman in my life. Ellean, you seem to fear me.
Don't! Kiss me!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>With a cry, almost of despair,</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>turns from</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>and
sinks on to the settee, covering her face with her hands.</i></p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_73" name="Page_73">[73]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Indignantly.</i>] Oh! Why is it! How dare you treat me like this?
What do you mean by it? What do you mean?</p>
<p class="center"><i>A</i> <span class="smcap">Servant</span> <i>enters.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Servant.</span></p>
<p>Mr. Drummle, ma'am.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Cayley Drummle</span>, <i>in riding dress, enters briskly.</i></p>
<p class="center"><i>The</i> <span class="smcap">Servant</span> <i>retires.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Recovering herself.</i>] Well, Cayley!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Shaking hands with her cordially.</i>] How are you? [<i>Shaking hands
with</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span>, <i>who rises.</i>] I saw you in the distance an hour ago,
in the gorse near Stapleton's.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>I didn't see you, Mr. Drummle.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>My dear Ellean, it is my experience that no<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_74" name="Page_74">[74]</a></span> charming young lady of
nineteen ever does see a man of forty-five. [<i>Laughing.</i>] Ha, Ha!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Going to the door.</i>] Paula, papa wishes me to drive down to the
village with you this morning. Do you care to take me?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Coldly.</i>] Oh, by all means. Pray tell Watts to balance the cart
for three.</p> <p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>goes out.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>How's Aubrey?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Very well—when Ellean's about the house.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>And you? I needn't ask.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Walking away to the window.</i>] Oh, a dog's life, my dear Cayley,
mine.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Eh?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_75" name="Page_75">[75]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Doesn't that define a happy marriage? I'm sleek, well-kept,
well-fed, never without a bone to gnaw and fresh straw to lie upon.
[<i>Gazing out of the window.</i>] Oh, dear me!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>H'm! Well, I heartily congratulate you on your kennel. The view from
the terrace here is superb.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Yes, I can see London.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>London! Not quite so far, surely?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p><i>I</i> can. Also the Mediterranean, on a fine day. I wonder what
Algiers looks like this morning from the sea! [<i>Impulsively.</i>] Oh,
Cayley, do you remember those jolly times on board Peter Jarman's
yacht when we lay off——? [<i>Stopping suddenly, seeing</i> <span class="smcap">Drummle</span>
<i>staring at her.</i>] Good gracious! What are we talking about!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>enters.</i><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_76" name="Page_76">[76]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To Drummle.</i>] Dear old chap! Has Paula asked you?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Not yet.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>We want you to come to us, now that you're leaving Mrs.
Cortelyon—at once, to-day. Stay a month, as long as you please—eh,
Paula?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>As long as you can possibly endure it—do, Cayley.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Looking at Aubrey.</i>] Delighted. [<i>To Paula.</i>] Charming of you to
have me.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>My dear man, you're a blessing. I must telegraph to London for more
fish! A strange appetite to cater for! Something to do, to do, to
do!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>She goes out in a mood of almost childish delight.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Eyeing Aubrey.</i>] Well?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_77" name="Page_77">[77]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>With a wearied, anxious look.</i>] Well, Cayley?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>How are you getting on?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>My position doesn't grow less difficult. I told you, when I met you
last week, of this feverish, jealous attachment of Paula's for
Ellean?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Yes. I hardly know why, but I came to the conclusion that you don't
consider it an altogether fortunate attachment.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Ellean doesn't respond to it.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>These are early days. Ellean will warm towards your wife by-and-by.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Ah, but there's the question, Cayley!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>What question?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_78" name="Page_78">[78]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>The question which positively distracts me. Ellean is so different
from—most women; I don't believe a purer creature exists out of
heaven. And I—I ask myself, am I doing right in exposing her to the
influence of poor Paula's light, careless nature?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>My dear Aubrey!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>That shocks you! So it does me. I assure you I long to urge my girl
to break down the reserve which keeps her apart from Paula, but
somehow I can't do it—well, I don't do it. How can I make you
understand? But when you come to us you'll understand quickly
enough. Cayley, there's hardly a subject you can broach on which
poor Paula hasn't some strange, out-of-the-way thought to give
utterance to; some curious, warped notion. They are not mere worldly
thoughts—unless, good God! they belong to the little hellish world
which our blackguardism has created: no, her ideas have too little
calculation in them to be called worldly. But it makes it the more
dreadful that such thoughts should be ready, spontaneous; that
expressing them has become a perfectly natural process; that her
words,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_79" name="Page_79">[79]</a></span> acts even, have almost lost their proper significance for
her, and seem beyond her control. Ah, and the pain of listening to
it all from the woman one loves, the woman one hoped to make happy
and contented, who is really and truly a good woman, as it were,
maimed! Well, this is my burden, and I shouldn't speak to you of it
but for my anxiety about Ellean. Ellean! What is to be her future?
It is in my hands; what am I to do? Cayley, when I remember how
Ellean comes to me, from another world I always think, when I
realise the charge that's laid on me, I find myself wishing, in a
sort of terror, that my child were safe under the ground!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>My dear Aubrey, aren't you making a mistake?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Very likely. What is it?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>A mistake, not in regarding your Ellean as an angel, but in
believing that, under any circumstances, it would be possible for
her to go through life without getting her white robe—shall we say,
a little dusty at the hem? Don't take me for a cynic. I am sure<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_80" name="Page_80">[80]</a></span>
there are many women upon earth who are almost divinely innocent;
but being on earth, they must send their robes to the laundry
occasionally. Ah, and it's right that they should have to do so, for
what can they learn from the checking of their little washing-bills
but lessons of charity? Now I see but two courses open to you for
the disposal of your angel.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Yes?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>You must either restrict her to a paradise which is, like every
earthly paradise, necessarily somewhat imperfect, or treat her as an
ordinary flesh-and-blood young woman, and give her the advantages of
that society to which she properly belongs.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Advantages?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>My dear Aubrey, of all forms of innocence mere ignorance is the
least admirable. Take my advice, let her walk and talk and suffer
and be healed with the great crowd. Do it, and hope that she'll some
day meet a good, honest fellow who'll make her life complete, happy,
secure. Now you see what I'm driving at.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_81" name="Page_81">[81]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>A sanguine programme, my dear Cayley! Oh, I'm not pooh-poohing it.
Putting sentiment aside, of course I know that a fortunate marriage
for Ellean would be the best—perhaps the only—solution of my
difficulty. But you forget the danger of the course you suggest.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Danger?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>If Ellean goes among men and women, how can she escape from
learning, sooner or later, the history of—poor Paula's—old life?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>H'm! You remember the episode of the Jeweller's Son in the Arabian
Nights? Of course you don't. Well, if your daughter lives, she
<i>can't</i> escape—what you're afraid of. [<span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>gives a half stifled
exclamation of pain.</i>] And when she does hear the story, surely it
would be better that she should have some knowledge of the world to
help her to understand it.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>To understand!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_82" name="Page_82">[82]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>To understand, to—to philosophise.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>To philosophise?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Philosophy is toleration, and it is only one step from toleration to
forgiveness.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>You're right, Cayley; I believe you always are. Yes, yes. But, even
if I had the courage to attempt to solve the problem of Ellean's
future in this way, I—I'm helpless.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>How?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>What means have I now of placing my daughter in the world I've left?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Oh, some friend—some woman friend.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I have none; they're gone.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>You're wrong there; I know one—<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_83" name="Page_83">[83]</a></span>—</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Listening.</i>] That's Paula's cart. Let's discuss this again.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Going up to the window and looking out.</i>] It isn't the dog-cart.
[<i>Turning to</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span>.] I hope you'll forgive me, old chap.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>What for?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Whose wheels do you think have been cutting ruts in your immaculate
drive?</p>
<p class="center"><i>A</i> <span class="smcap">Servant</span> <i>enters.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Servant.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span>.] Mrs. Cortelyon, sir.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Mrs. Cortelyon! [<i>After a short pause.</i>] Very well. [<i>The</i> <span class="smcap">Servant</span>
<i>withdraws.</i>] What on earth is the meaning of this?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Ahem! While I've been our old friend's guest, Aubrey, we have very
naturally talked a good deal about you and yours.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_84" name="Page_84">[84]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Indeed, have you?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Yes, and Alice Cortelyon has arrived at the conclusion that it would
have been far kinder had she called on Mrs. Tanqueray long ago.
She's going abroad for Easter before settling down in London for the
season, and I believe she has come over this morning to ask for
Ellean's companionship.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Oh, I see! [<i>Frowning.</i>] Quite a friendly little conspiracy,
my dear Cayley!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Conspiracy! Not at all, I assure you. [<i>Laughing.</i>] Ha, ha!</p>
<blockquote>
<p class="hang"><span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>enters from the hall with</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon</span>,<i>a handsome, good
humoured, spirited woman of about forty-five.</i></p></blockquote>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Papa——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span>, <i>shaking hands with him heartily.</i>] Well, Aubrey, how
are you? I've just been telling<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_85" name="Page_85">[85]</a></span> this great girl of yours that I
knew her when she was a sad-faced, pale baby. How is Mrs. Tanqueray?
I have been a bad neighbour, and I'm here to beg forgiveness. Is she
indoors?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>She's upstairs putting on a hat, I believe.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Sitting comfortably.</i>] Ah! [<i>She looks round:</i> <span class="smcap">Drummle</span> <i>and</i>
<span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>are talking together in the hall.</i>] We used to be very frank
with each other, Aubrey. I suppose the old footing is no longer
possible, eh?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>If so, I'm not entirely to blame, Mrs. Cortelyon.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>Mrs. Cortelyon? H'm! No, I admit it. But you must make some little
allowance for me, <i>Mr. Tanqueray</i>. Your first wife and I, as girls,
were like two cherries on one stalk, and then I was the confidential
friend of your married life. That post, perhaps, wasn't altogether a
sinecure. And now—well, when a woman gets to my age I suppose she's
a stupid, prejudiced, conventional creature. However,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_86" name="Page_86">[86]</a></span> I've got over
it and—[<i>giving him her hand</i>]—I hope you'll be enormously happy
and let me be a friend once more.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Thank you, Alice.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>That's right. I feel more cheerful than I've done for weeks. But I
suppose it would serve me right if the second Mrs. Tanqueray showed
me the door. Do you think she will?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Listening.</i>] Here is my wife. [<span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon</span> <i>rises, and</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span>
<i>enters, dressed for driving; she stops abruptly on seeing</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs.
Cortelyon</span>.] Paula dear, Mrs. Cortelyon has called to see you.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>starts, looks at</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon</span> <i>irresolutely, then after a
slight pause barely touches</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon's</span> <i>extended hand.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Whose manner now alternates between deliberate insolence and
assumed sweetness.</i>] Mrs.——? What name, Aubrey?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Mrs. Cortelyon.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_87" name="Page_87">[87]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Cortelyon? Oh, yes. Cortelyon.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Carefully guarding herself throughout against any expression of
resentment.</i>] Aubrey ought to have told you that Alice Cortelyon and
he are very old friends.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh, very likely he has mentioned the circumstance. I have quite a
wretched memory.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>You know we are neighbours, Mrs. Tanqueray.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Neighbours? Are we really? Won't you sit down? [<i>They both sit.</i>]
Neighbours! That's most interesting!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>Very near neighbours. You can see my roof from your windows.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I fancy I <i>have</i> observed a roof. But you have been away from home;
you have only just returned.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_88" name="Page_88">[88]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>I? What makes you think that?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Why, because it is two months since we came to Highercoombe, and I
don't remember your having called.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>Your memory is now terribly accurate. No, I've not been away from
home, and it is to explain my neglect that I am here, rather
unceremoniously, this morning.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh, to explain—quite so. [<i>With mock solicitude.</i>] Ah, you've been
very ill; I ought to have seen that before.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>Ill!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>You look dreadfully pulled down. We poor women show illness so
plainly in our faces, don't we?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Anxiously.</i>] Paula dear, Mrs. Cortelyon is the picture of health.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_89" name="Page_89">[89]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>[<i>With some asperity.</i>] I have never <i>felt</i> better in my life.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Looking round innocently.</i>] Have I said anything awkward? Aubrey,
tell Mrs. Cortelyon how stupid and thoughtless I always am!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Drummle</span> <i>who is now standing close to her.</i>] Really,
Cayley——! [<i>He soothes her with a nod and smile and a motion of
his finger to his lip.</i>] Mrs. Tanqueray, I am afraid my explanation
will not be quite so satisfactory as either of those you have just
helped me to. You may have heard—but, if you have heard, you have
doubtless forgotten—that twenty years ago, when your husband first
lived here, I was a constant visitor at Highercoombe.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Twenty years ago—fancy. I was a naughty little child then.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>Possibly. Well, at that time, and till the end of her life, my
affections were centred upon the lady of this house.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_90" name="Page_90">[90]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Were they? That was very sweet of you.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>approaches</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon,</span> <i>listening intently to her.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>I will say no more on that score, but I must add this: when, two
months ago, you came here, I realised, perhaps for the first time,
that I was a middle-aged woman, and that it had become impossible
for me to accept without some effort a breaking-in upon many tender
associations. There, Mrs. Tanqueray, that is my confession. Will you
try to understand it and pardon me?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Watching</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean,</span>—<i>sneeringly.</i>] Ellean dear, you appear to be
very interested in Mrs. Cortelyon's reminiscences; I don't think I
can do better than make you my mouthpiece—there is such sympathy
between us. What do you say—can we bring ourselves to forgive Mrs.
Cortelyon for neglecting us for two weary months?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean,</span> <i>pleasantly.</i>] Well, Ellean? <span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_91" name="Page_91">[91]</a></span>[<i>With a little cry of
tenderness</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>impulsively sits beside</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon</span> <i>and
takes her hand.</i>] My dear child!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>In an undertone to</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span>.] Ellean isn't so very slow in taking
to Mrs. Cortelyon!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span>.] Come, this encourages me to broach my
scheme. Mrs. Tanqueray, it strikes me that you two good people are
just now excellent company for each other, while Ellean would
perhaps be glad of a little peep into the world you are anxious to
avoid. Now, I'm going to Paris to-morrow for a week or two before
settling down in Chester Square, so—don't gasp, both of you!—if
this girl is willing, and you have made no other arrangements for
her, will you let her come with me to Paris, and afterwards remain
with me in town during the Season? [<span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>utters an exclamation of
surprise.</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>is silent.</i>] What do you say?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Paula—Paula dear. [<i>Hesitatingly.</i>] My dear Mrs. Cortelyon, this is
wonderfully kind of you; I am really at a loss to—eh, Cayley?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_92" name="Page_92">[92]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Watching</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>apprehensively.</i>] Kind! Now I must say I don't
think so! I begged Alice to take <i>me</i> to Paris, and she declined. I
am thrown over for Ellean! Ha! ha!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Laughing.</i>] What nonsense you talk, Cayley!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>The laughter dies out.</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>remains quite still.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Paula dear.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Slowly collecting herself.</i>] One moment. I—I don't quite——
[<i>To</i> Mrs. <span class="smcap">Cortelyon</span>.] You propose that Ellean leaves Highercoombe
almost at once and remains with you some months?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>It would be a mercy to me. You can afford to be generous to a
desolate old widow. Come, Mrs. Tanqueray, won't you spare her?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Won't <i>I</i> spare her. [<i>Suspiciously.</i>] Have you mentioned your plan
to Aubrey—before I came in?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_93" name="Page_93">[93]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>No, I had no opportunity.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Nor to Ellean?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>Oh, no.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Looking about her, in suppressed excitement.</i>] This hasn't been
discussed at all, behind my back?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>My dear Mrs. Tanqueray!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Ellean, let us hear your voice in the matter!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>I should like to go with Mrs. Cortelyon—</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Ah!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>That is, if—if——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>If—if what?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p><i>[Looking towards</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span>, <i>appealingly.</i>] Papa!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_94" name="Page_94">[94]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>In a hard voice.</i>] Oh, of course—I forgot. [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span>.] My dear
Aubrey, it rests with you, naturally, whether I am—to lose—Ellean.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Lose Ellean! [<i>Advancing to</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span>.] There is no question of losing
Ellean. You would see Ellean in town constantly when she returned
from Paris; isn't that so, Mrs. Cortelyon?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>Certainly.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Laughing softly.</i>] Oh, I didn't know I should be allowed that
privilege.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>Privilege, my dear Mrs. Tanqueray!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Ha, ha! that makes all the difference, doesn't it?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>With assumed gaiety.</i>] All the difference? I should think so!
[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span>, <span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_95" name="Page_95">[95]</a></span><i>laying his hand upon her head, tenderly.</i>] And you
are quite certain you wish to see what the world is like on the
other side of Black Moor?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>If you are willing, papa, I am quite certain.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Looking at</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>irresolutely, then speaking with an effort.</i>]
Then I—I am willing.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Rising and striking the table lightly with her clenched hand.</i>]
That decides it! [<i>There is a general movement. Excitedly to</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs.
Cortelyon</span>, <i>who advances towards her.</i>] When do you want her?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>We go to town this afternoon at five o'clock, and sleep to-night at
Bayliss's. There is barely time for her to make her preparations.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I will undertake that she is ready.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>I've a great deal to scramble through at home too, as you may guess.
Good-bye!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_96" name="Page_96">[96]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Turning away.</i>] Mrs. Cortelyon is going.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>stands looking out of the window, with her back to those in
the room.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Drummle</span>.] Cayley——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To her.</i>] Eh?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>I've gone through it, for the sake of Aubrey and his child, but I—I
feel a hundred. Is that a mad-woman?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Of course; all jealous women are mad.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He goes out with</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span>.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Hesitatingly, to</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span>.] Good-bye, Mrs. Tanqueray.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>inclines her head with the slightest possible movement, then
resumes her former position.</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>comes from the hall and takes</i>
<span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon</span> <i>out of the room. After a brief silence,</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span>
<i>turns with a fierce cry, and hurriedly takes off her coat and hat,
and tosses them upon the settee.</i></p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_97" name="Page_97">[97]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh! Oh! Oh! [<i>She drops into the chair as</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>returns; he
stands looking at her.</i>] Who's that?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I. You have altered your mind about going out?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Yes. Please to ring the bell.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Touching the bell.</i>] You are angry about Mrs. Cortelyon and
Ellean. Let me try to explain my reasons——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Be careful what you say to me just now! I have never felt like
this—except once—in my life. Be careful what you say to me!</p>
<p class="center"><i>A</i> <span class="smcap">Servant</span> <i>enters.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Rising.</i>] Is Watts at the door with the cart?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Servant.</span></p>
<p>Yes, ma'am.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_98" name="Page_98">[98]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Tell him to drive down to the post-office directly, with this.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>Picking up the letter which has been lying upon the table.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>With that?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Yes. My letter to Lady Orreyed.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>Giving the letter to the</i> <span class="smcap">Servant</span>, <i>who goes out.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Surely you don't wish me to countermand any order of yours to a
servant? Call the man back—take the letter from him!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I have not the slightest intention of doing so.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I must, then. [<i>Going to the door. She snatches up her hat and coat
and follows him.</i>] What are you going to do?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>If you stop that letter, walk out of the house.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He hesitates, then leaves the door.</i></p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_99" name="Page_99">[99]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I am right in believing that to be the letter inviting George
Orreyed and his wife to stay here, am I not?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh yes—quite right.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Let it go; I'll write to him by-and-by.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Facing him.</i>] You dare!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Hush, Paula!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Insult me again and, upon my word, I'll go straight out of the
house!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Insult you?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Insult me! What else is it? My God! what else is it? What do you
mean by taking Ellean from me?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Listen——!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Listen to <i>me</i>! And how do you take her? You<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_100" name="Page_100">[100]</a></span> pack her off in the
care of a woman who has deliberately held aloof from me, who's
thrown mud at me! Yet this Cortelyon creature has only to put foot
here once to be entrusted with the charge of the girl you know I
dearly want to keep near me!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Paula dear! hear me——!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Ah! of course, of course! I can't be so useful to your daughter as
such people as this; and so I'm to be given the go-by for any town
friend of yours who turns up and chooses to patronise us! Hah! Very
well, at any rate, as you take Ellean from me you justify my looking
for companions where I can most readily find 'em.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>You wish me to fully appreciate your reason for sending that letter
to Lady Orreyed?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Precisely—I do.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>And could you, after all, go back to associates of that order? It's
not possible!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_101" name="Page_101">[101]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Mockingly.</i>] What, not after the refining influence of these
intensely respectable surroundings? [<i>Going to the door.</i>] We'll
see!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Paula!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Violently.</i>] We'll see!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>She goes out. He stands still looking after her.</i></p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2>THE THIRD ACT</h2>
<blockquote>
<p class="hang"><i>The drawing-room at "Highercoombe." Facing the spectator are two
large French windows, sheltered by a verandah, leading into the
garden; on the right is a door opening into a small hall. The
fireplace, with a large mirror above it, is on the left-hand side of
the room, and higher up in the same wall are double doors recessed.
The room is richly furnished, and everything betokens taste and
luxury. The windows are open, and there is moonlight in the garden.</i></p>
<p class="hang"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed</span>, <i>a pretty, affected doll of a woman with a mincing
voice and flaxen hair, is sitting on the ottoman, her head resting
against the drum, and her eyes closed.</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span>, <i>looking pale, worn,
and thoroughly unhappy, is sitting at a table. Both are in sumptuous
dinner-gowns.</i></p></blockquote>
<div class="medskip"> </div>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Opening her eyes.</i>] Well, I never! I dropped off!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_103" name="Page_103">[103]</a></span>
[<i>Feeling her hair.</i>] Just fancy! Where are the men?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Icily.</i>] Outside, smoking.</p>
<blockquote>
<p class="hang"><i>A</i> <span class="smcap">Servant</span> <i>enters with coffee, which he hands to</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed</span>.
<span class="smcap">Sir George Orreyed</span> <i>comes in by the window. He is a man of about
thirty-five, with a low forehead, a receding chin, a vacuous
expression, and an ominous redness about the nose.</i></p></blockquote>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Taking coffee.</i>] Here's Dodo.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Sir George.</span></p>
<p>I say, the flies under the verandah make you swear. [<i>The</i> <span class="smcap">Servant</span>
<i>hands coffee to</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span>, <i>who declines it, then to</i> <span class="smcap">Sir George</span>, <i>who
takes a cup.</i>] Hi! wait a bit! [<i>He looks at the tray searchingly,
then puts back his cup.</i>] Never mind. [<i>Quietly to</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed</span>.] I
say, they're dooced sparin' with their liqueur, ain't they?</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>The</i> <span class="smcap">Servant</span> <i>goes out at window.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Sir George</span>.] Won't you take coffee, George?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_104" name="Page_104">[104]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Sir George.</span></p>
<p>No, thanks. It's gettin' near time for a whisky and potass.
[<i>Approaching</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span>, <i>regarding</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed</span> <i>admiringly.</i>] I say,
Birdie looks rippin' to-night, don't she?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Your wife?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Sir George.</span></p>
<p>Yaas—Birdie.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Rippin'?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Sir George.</span></p>
<p>Yaas.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Quite—quite rippin'.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He moves round to the settee.</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>watches him with distaste,
then rises and walks away.</i> <span class="smcap">Sir George</span> <i>falls asleep on the settee.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>Paula love, I fancied you and Aubrey were a little more friendly at
dinner. You haven't made it up, have you?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>We? Oh, no. We speak before others, that's all.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_105" name="Page_105">[105]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>And how long do you intend to carry on this game, dear?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Turning away impatiently.</i>] I really can't tell you.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>Sit down, old girl; don't be so fidgety. [<span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>sits on the upper
seat of the ottoman with her back to</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed</span>.] Of course, it's
my duty, as an old friend, to give you a good talking-to—[<span class="smcap">Paula</span>
<i>glares at her suddenly and fiercely.</i>]—but really I've found one
gets so many smacks in the face through interfering in matrimonial
squabbles that I've determined to drop it.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I think you're wise.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>However, I must say that I do wish you'd look at marriage in a more
solemn light—just as I do, in fact. It is such a beautiful
thing—marriage, and if people in our position don't respect it, and
set a good example by living happily with their husbands, what can
you expect from the middle classes? When did this sad state of
affairs between you and Aubrey actually begin?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_106" name="Page_106">[106]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Actually, a fortnight and three days ago; I haven't calculated the
minutes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>A day or two before Dodo and I turned up—arrived.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Yes. One always remembers one thing by another; we left off speaking
to each other the morning I wrote asking you to visit us.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>Lucky for you I was able to pop down, wasn't it, dear?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Glaring at her again.</i>] Most fortunate.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>A serious split with your husband without a pal on the premises—I
should say, without a friend in the house—would be most unpleasant.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Turning to her abruptly.</i>] This place must be horribly doleful for
you and George just now. At<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_107" name="Page_107">[107]</a></span> least you ought to consider him before
me. Why don't you leave me to my difficulties?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>Oh, we're quite comfortable, dear, thank you—both of us. George and
me are so wrapped up in each other, it doesn't matter where we are.
I don't want to crow over you, old girl, but I've got a perfect
husband.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Sir George</span> <i>is now fast asleep, his head thrown back and his mouth
open, looking hideous.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Glancing at</i> <span class="smcap">Sir George</span>.] So you've given me to understand.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>Not that we don't have our little differences. Why, we fell out only
this very morning. You remember the diamond and ruby tiara Charley
Prestwick gave poor dear Connie Tirlemont years ago, don't you?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>No, I do not.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>No? Well, it's in the market. Benjamin of Piccadilly has got it in
his shop-window, and I've set my heart on it.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_108" name="Page_108">[108]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>You consider it quite necessary?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>Yes, because what I say to Dodo is this—a lady of my station must
smother herself with hair ornaments. It's different with you,
love—people don't look for so much blaze from you, but I've got
rank to keep up; haven't I?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>Well, that was the cause of the little set-to between I and Dodo
this morning. He broke two chairs, he was in such a rage. I forgot,
they're your chairs; do you mind?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>No.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>You know, poor Dodo can't lose his temper without smashing
something; if it isn't a chair, it's a mirror; if it isn't that,
it's china—a bit of Dresden for choice. Dear old pet! he loves a
bit of Dresden when he's furious. He doesn't really throw things
<i>at</i> me, dear; he simply lifts them up and drops them, like a<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_109" name="Page_109">[109]</a></span>
gentleman. I expect our room upstairs will look rather wrecky before
I get that tiara.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Excuse the suggestion, perhaps your husband can't afford it.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>Oh, how dreadfully changed you are, Paula! Dodo can always mortgage
something, or borrow of his ma. What <i>is</i> coming to you!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Ah!</p> <p class="rdir hang">[<i>She sits at the piano and touches the keys.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>Oh, yes, do play! That's the one thing I envy you for.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>What shall I play?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>What was that heavenly piece you gave us last night, dear?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>A bit of Schubert. Would you like to hear it again?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>You don't know any comic songs, do you?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_110" name="Page_110">[110]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I'm afraid not.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>I leave it to you, then.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>plays.</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Cayley Drummle</span> <i>appear outside the
window; they look into the room.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Drummle</span>. ] You can see her face in that mirror. Poor girl, how
ill and wretched she looks.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>When are the Orreyeds going?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Heaven knows!</p> <p class="rdir hang">[<i>Entering the room.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>But <i>you're</i> entertaining them; what's it to do with Heaven?</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>Following</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span>.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Do you know, Cayley, that even the Orreyeds serve a useful purpose?
My wife actually speaks to me before our guests—think of that! I've
come to rejoice at the presence of the Orreyeds!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_111" name="Page_111">[111]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>I daresay; we're taught that beetles are sent for a benign end.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Cayley, talk to Paula again to-night.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Certainly, if I get the chance.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Let's contrive it. George is asleep; perhaps I can get that doll out
of the way. [<i>As they advance into the room,</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>abruptly ceases
playing and finds interest in a volume of music.</i> <span class="smcap">Sir George</span> <i>is now
nodding and snoring apoplectically.</i>] Lady Orreyed, whenever you
feel inclined for a game of billiards I'm at your service.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Jumping up.</i>] Charmed, I'm sure! I really thought you'd forgotten
poor little me. Oh, look at Dodo!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>No, no, don't wake him; he's tired.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>I must, he looks so plain. [<i>Rousing</i> <span class="smcap">Sir George</span>.] Dodo! Dodo!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_112" name="Page_112">[112]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Sir George.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Stupidly.</i>] 'Ullo!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>Dodo, dear, you were snoring.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Sir George.</span></p>
<p>Oh, I say, you could 'a told me that by-and-by.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>You want a cigar, George; come into the billiard-room. [<i>Giving his
arm to</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed</span>.] Cayley, bring Paula.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed</span> <i>go out.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Sir George.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Rising.</i>] Hey, what! Billiard-room! [<i>Looking at his watch.</i>] How
goes the——? Phew! 'Ullo, 'Ullo! Whisky and potass!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He goes rapidly after</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed</span>. <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>resumes
playing.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>After a pause.</i>] Don't moon about after me, Cayley; follow the
others.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Thanks, by-and-by. [<i>Sitting.</i>] That's pretty.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_113" name="Page_113">[113]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>After another pause, still playing.</i>] I wish you wouldn't stare
so.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Was I staring? I'm sorry. [<i>She plays a little longer, then stops
suddenly, rises, and goes to the window, where she stands looking
out.</i> <span class="smcap">Drummle</span> <i>moves from the ottoman to the settee.</i>] A lovely
night.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Startled.</i>] Oh! [<i>Without turning to him.</i>] Why do you hop about
like a monkey?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Hot rooms play the deuce with the nerves. Now, it would have done
you good to have walked in the garden with us after dinner and made
merry. Why didn't you?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>You know why.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Ah, you're thinking of the—difference between you and Aubrey?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Yes, I <i>am</i> thinking of it.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_114" name="Page_114">[114]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Well, so am I. How long——?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Getting on for three weeks.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Bless me, it must be! And this would have been such a night to have
healed it! Moonlight, the stars, the scent of flowers; and yet
enough darkness to enable a kind woman to rest her hand for an
instant on the arm of a good fellow who loves her. Ah, ha! it's a
wonderful power, dear Mrs. Aubrey, the power of an offended woman!
Only realise it! Just that one touch—the mere tips of her
fingers—and, for herself and another, she changes the colour of the
whole world!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Turning to him, calmly.</i>] Cayley, my dear man, you talk exactly
like a very romantic old lady.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>She leaves the window and sits playing with the knick-knacks on
the table.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To himself.</i>] H'm, that hasn't done it! Well—ha, ha!—I accept
the suggestion. An old woman, eh?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_115" name="Page_115">[115]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh, I didn't intend——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>But why not? I've every qualification—well, almost. And I confess
it would have given this withered bosom a throb of grandmotherly
satisfaction if I could have seen you and Aubrey at peace before I
take my leave to-morrow.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>To-morrow, Cayley!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>I must.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh, this house is becoming unendurable.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>You're very kind. But you've got the Orreyeds.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Fiercely.</i>] The Orreyeds! I—I hate the Orreyeds! I lie awake at
night, hating them!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Pardon me, I've understood that their visit is, in some degree,
owing to—hem!—your suggestion.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_116" name="Page_116">[116]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Heavens! that doesn't make me like them better. Somehow or another,
I—I've outgrown these people. This woman—I used to think her
"jolly!"—sickens me. I can't breathe when she's near me: the whiff
of her handkerchief turns me faint! And she patronises me by the
hour, until I—I feel my nails growing longer with every word she
speaks!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>My dear lady, why on earth don't you say all this to Aubrey?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh, I've been such an utter fool, Cayley!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Soothingly.</i>] Well, well, mention it to Aubrey!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>No, no, you don't understand. What do you think I've done?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Done! What, <i>since</i> you invited the Orreyeds?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Yes; I must tell you—<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_117" name="Page_117">[117]</a></span>—</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Perhaps you'd better not.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Look here. I've intercepted some letters from Mrs. Cortelyon and
Ellean to—him. [<i>Producing three unopened letters from the bodice
of her dress.</i>] There are the accursed things! From Paris—two from
the Cortelyon woman, the other from Ellean!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>But why—why?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I don't know. Yes, I do! I saw letters coming from Ellean to her
father; not a line to me—not a line. And one morning it happened I
was downstairs before he was, and I spied this one lying with his
heap on the breakfast-table, and I slipped it into my pocket—out of
malice, Cayley, pure devilry! And a day or two afterwards I met
Elwes the postman at the Lodge, and took the letters from him, and
found these others amongst 'em. I felt simply fiendish when I saw
them—fiendish! [<i>Returning the letters to her bodice.</i>] And now I
carry them about with me, and they're scorching me like a mustard
plaster!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_118" name="Page_118">[118]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Oh, this accounts for Aubrey not hearing from Paris lately!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>That's an ingenious conclusion to arrive at! Of course it does!
[<i>With an hysterical laugh.</i>] Ha, ha!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Well, well! [<i>Laughing.</i>] Ha, ha, ha!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Turning upon him.</i>] I suppose it <i>is</i> amusing!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>I beg pardon.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Heaven knows I've little enough to brag about! I'm a bad lot, but
not in mean tricks of this sort. In all my life this is the most
caddish thing I've done. How am I to get rid of these
letters—that's what I want to know? How am I to get rid of them?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>If I were you I should take Aubrey aside and put them into his hands
as soon as possible.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_119" name="Page_119">[119]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>What! and tell him to his face that I——! No, thank you. I suppose
<i>you</i> wouldn't like to——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>No, no; I won't touch 'em!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>And you call yourself my friend?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Good-humouredly.</i>] No, I don't!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Perhaps I'll tie them together and give them to his man in the
morning.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>That won't avoid an explanation.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Recklessly.</i>] Oh, then he must miss them——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>And trace them.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Throwing herself upon the ottoman.</i>] I don't care!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_120" name="Page_120">[120]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>I know you don't; but let me send him to you now, may I?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Now! What do you think a woman's made of? I couldn't stand it,
Cayley. I haven't slept for nights; and last night there was
thunder, too! I believe I've got the horrors.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Taking the little hand-mirror from the table.</i>] You'll sleep well
enough when you deliver those letters. Come, come, Mrs. Aubrey—a
good night's rest! [<i>Holding the mirror before her face.</i>] It's
quite time.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>She looks at herself for a moment, then snatches the mirror from
him.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>You brute, Cayley, to show me that!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Then—may I? Be guided by a fr—a poor old woman! May I?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>You'll kill me, amongst you!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_121" name="Page_121">[121]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>What do you say?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>After a pause.</i>] Very well. [<i>He nods his head and goes out
rapidly. She looks after him for a moment, and calls "Cayley!
Cayley!" Then she again produces the letters, deliberately, one by
one, fingering them with aversion. Suddenly she starts, turning her
head towards the door.</i>] Ah!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>enters quickly.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Paula!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Handing him the letters, her face averted.</i>] There! [<i>He examines
the letters, puzzled, and looks at her inquiringly.</i>] They are many
days old. I stole them, I suppose to make you anxious and unhappy.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He looks at the letters again, then lays them aside on the table.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Gently.</i>] Paula, dear, it doesn't matter.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>After a short pause.</i>] Why—why do you take it like this?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_122" name="Page_122">[122]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>What did you expect?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh, but I suppose silent reproaches are really the severest. And
then, naturally, you are itching to open your letters.</p> <p class="rdir hang">[<i>She crosses
the room as if to go.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Paula! [<i>She pauses.</i>] Surely, surely it's all over now?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>All over! [<i>Mockingly.</i>.] Has my step-daughter returned then? When
did she arrive? I haven't heard of it!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>You can be very cruel.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>That word's always on a man's lips; he uses it if his soup's cold.
[<i>With another movement as if to go.</i>] Need we——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I know I've wounded you, Paula. But isn't there any way out of
this?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_123" name="Page_123">[123]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>When does Ellean return? To-morrow? Next week?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Wearily.</i>] Oh! Why should we grudge Ellean the little pleasure she
is likely to find in Paris and in London.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I grudge her nothing, if that's a hit at me. But with that
woman——!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>It must be that woman or another. You know that at present we are
unable to give Ellean the opportunity of—of——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Of mixing with respectable people.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>The opportunity of gaining friends, experience, ordinary knowledge
of the world. If you are interested in Ellean, can't you see how
useful Mrs. Cortelyon's good offices are?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>May I put one question? At the end of the London season, when Mrs.
Cortelyon has done with Ellean, is it quite understood that the
girl<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_124" name="Page_124">[124]</a></span> comes back to us? [<span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>is silent.</i>] Is it? Is it?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Let us wait till the end of the season——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh! I knew it. You're only fooling me; you put me off with any
trash. I believe you've sent Ellean away, not for the reasons you
give, but because you don't consider me a decent companion for her,
because you're afraid she might get a little of her innocence rubbed
off in my company? Come, isn't that the truth? Be honest! Isn't that
it?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Yes.</p> <p class="rdir hang">[<i>There is a moment's silence on both sides.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>With uplifted hands as if to strike him.</i>] Oh!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Taking her by the wrists.</i>] Sit down. Sit down. [<i>He puts her into
a chair; she shakes herself free with a cry.</i>] Now listen to me.
Fond as you are, Paula, of harking back to your past, there's one
chapter of it you always let alone. I've never asked you to speak of
it; you've never offered to speak of it. I mean the chapter that
relates to the time when you<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_125" name="Page_125">[125]</a></span> were—like Ellean. [<i>She attempts to
rise; he restrains her.</i>] No, no.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I don't choose to talk about that time. I won't satisfy your
curiosity.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>My dear Paula, I have no curiosity—I know what you were at Ellean's
age. I'll tell you. You hadn't a thought that wasn't a wholesome
one, you hadn't an impulse that didn't tend towards good, you never
harboured a notion you couldn't have gossiped about to a parcel of
children. [<i>She makes another effort to rise: he lays his hand
lightly on her shoulder.</i>] And this was a very few years back—there
are days now when you look like a schoolgirl—but think of the
difference between the two Paulas. You'll have to think hard,
because after a cruel life one's perceptions grow a thick skin. But,
for God's sake, do think till you get these two images clearly in
your mind, and then ask yourself what sort of a friend such a woman
as you are to-day would have been for the girl of seven or eight
years ago.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Rising.</i>] How dare you? I could be almost as good a friend to
Ellean as her own mother would<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_126" name="Page_126">[126]</a></span> have been had she lived. I know what
you mean. How dare you?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>You say that; very likely you believe it. But you're blind, Paula;
you're blind. You! Every belief that a young, pure-minded girl holds
sacred—that you once held sacred—you now make a target for a jest,
a sneer, a paltry cynicism. I tell you, you're not mistress any
longer of your thoughts or your tongue. Why, how often, sitting
between you and Ellean, have I seen her cheeks turn scarlet as
you've rattled off some tale that belongs by right to the club or
the smoking-room! Have you noticed the blush? If you have, has the
cause of it ever struck you? And this is the girl you say you love,
I admit that you <i>do</i> love, whose love you expect in return! Oh,
Paula, I make the best, the only, excuse for you when I tell you
you're blind!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Ellean—Ellean blushes easily.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>You blushed as easily a few years ago.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>After a short pause.</i>] Well! Have you finished your sermon?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_127" name="Page_127">[127]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>With a gesture of despair.</i>] Oh, Paula!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>Going up to the window and standing with his back to the room.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To herself.</i>] A few—years ago! [<i>She walks slowly towards the
door, then suddenly drops upon the ottoman in a paroxysm of
weeping.</i>] O God! A few years ago!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Going to her.</i>] Paula!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Sobbing.</i>] Oh, don't touch me!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Paula!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh, go away from me! [<i>He goes back a few steps, and after a little
while she becomes calmer and rises unsteadily; then in an altered
tone.</i>] Look here——! [<i>He advances a step; she checks him with a
quick gesture.</i>] Look here! Get rid of these people—Mabel and her
husband—as soon as possible! I—I've done with them!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_128" name="Page_128">[128]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>In a whisper.</i>] Paula!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>And then—then—when the time comes for Ellean to leave Mrs.
Cortelyon, give me—give me another chance! [<i>He advances again, but
she shrinks away.</i>] No, no!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>She goes out by the door on the right. He sinks on to the settee,
covering his eyes with his hands. There is a brief silence, then a</i>
<span class="smcap">Servant</span> <i>enters.</i>]</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Servant.</span></p>
<p>Mrs. Cortelyon, sir, with Miss Ellean.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>rises to meet</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon</span>, <i>who enters, followed by</i>
<span class="smcap">Ellean</span>, <i>both being in travelling dresses. The</i> <span class="smcap">Servant</span> <i>withdraws.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Shaking hands with</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span>.] Oh, my dear Aubrey!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Mrs. Cortelyon! [<i>Kissing</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span>.] Ellean dear!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Papa, is all well at home?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_129" name="Page_129">[129]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>We're shockingly anxious.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Yes, yes, all's well. This is quite unexpected. [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs.
Cortelyon</span>.] You've found Paris insufferably hot?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>Insufferably hot! Paris is pleasant enough. We've had no letter from
you!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I wrote to Ellean a week ago.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>Without alluding to the subject I had written to you upon.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Thinking.</i>] Ah, of course——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>And since then we've both written and you've been absolutely silent.
Oh, it's too bad!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Picking up the letters from the table.</i>] It isn't altogether my
fault. Here are the letters—<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_130" name="Page_130">[130]</a></span>—</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Papa!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>They're unopened.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>An accident delayed their reaching me till this evening. I'm afraid
this has upset you very much.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>Upset me!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>[<i>In an undertone to</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon</span>.] Never mind. Not now,
dear—not to-night.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Eh?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>aloud.</i>] Child, run away and take your things off. She
doesn't look as if she'd journeyed from Paris to-day.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I've never seen her with such a colour.</p> <p class="rdir hang">[<i>Taking</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean's</span> <i>hands.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span>, <i>in a faint voice.</i>] Papa, Mrs. Cortelyon has been so
very, very kind to me, but I—I have come home.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>She goes out.</i></p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_131" name="Page_131">[131]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Come home! [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon</span>.] Ellean returns to us, then?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>That's the very point I put to you in my letters, and you oblige me
to travel from Paris to Willowmere on a warm day to settle it. I
think perhaps it's right that Ellean should be with you just now,
although I—— My dear friend, circumstances are a little altered.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Alice, you're in some trouble.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>Well—yes, I <i>am</i> in trouble. You remember pretty little Mrs.
Brereton who was once Caroline Ardale?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Quite well.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>She's a widow now, poor thing. She has the <i>entresol</i> of the house
where we've been lodging in the Avenue de Friedland. Caroline's a
dear chum of mine; she formed a great liking for Ellean.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I'm very glad.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_132" name="Page_132">[132]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>Yes, it's nice for her to meet her mother's friends. Er—that young
Hugh Ardale the papers were full of some time ago—he's Caroline
Brereton's brother, you know.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>No, I didn't know. What did he do? I forget.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>Checked one of those horrid mutinies at some far-away station in
India, marched down with a handful of his men and a few faithful
natives, and held the place until he was relieved. They gave him his
company and a V.C. for it.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>And he's Mrs. Brereton's brother?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>Yes. He's with his sister—<i>was</i>, rather—in Paris. He's
home—invalided. Good gracious, Aubrey, why don't you help me out?
Can't you guess what has occurred?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Alice!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>Young Ardale—Ellean!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_133" name="Page_133">[133]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>An attachment?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>Yes, Aubrey. [<i>After a little pause.</i>] Well, I suppose I've got
myself into sad disgrace. But really I didn't foresee anything of
this kind. A serious, reserved child like Ellean, and a boyish,
high-spirited soldier—it never struck me as being likely. [<span class="smcap">Aubrey</span>
<i>paces to and fro thoughtfully.</i>] I did all I could directly Captain
Ardale spoke—wrote to you at once. Why on earth don't you receive
your letters promptly, and when you do get them why can't you open
them? I endured the anxiety till last night, and then made up my
mind—home! Of course, it has worried me terribly. My head's
bursting. Are there any salts about? [<span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>fetches a bottle from
the cabinet and hands it to her.</i>] We've had one of those hateful
smooth crossings that won't let you be properly indisposed.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>My dear Alice, I assure you I've no thought of blaming you.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>That statement always precedes a quarrel.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_134" name="Page_134">[134]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I don't know whether this is the worst or the best luck. How will my
wife regard it? Is Captain Ardale a good fellow?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>My dear Aubrey, you'd better read up the accounts of his wonderful
heroism. Face to face with death for a whole week; always with a
smile and a cheering word for the poor helpless souls depending on
him! Of course, it's that that has stirred the depths of your
child's nature. I've watched her while we've been dragging the story
out of him, and if angels look different from Ellean at that moment,
I don't desire to meet any, that's all!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>If you were in my position——? But you can't judge.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>Why, if I had a marriageable daughter of my own and Captain Ardale
proposed for her, naturally I should cry my eyes out all night—but
I should thank Heaven in the morning.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>You believe so thoroughly in him?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_135" name="Page_135">[135]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>Do you think I should have only a headache at this minute if I
didn't! Look here, you've got to see me down the lane; that's the
least you can do, my friend. Come into my house for a moment and
shake hands with Hugh.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>What, is he here?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>He came through with us, to present himself formally to-morrow.
Where are my gloves? [<span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>fetches them from the ottoman.</i>] Make
my apologies to Mrs. Tanqueray, please. She's well, I hope? [<i>Going
towards the door.</i>] I can't feel sorry she hasn't seen me in this
condition.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>enters.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon</span>.] I've been waiting to wish you good-night. I
was afraid I'd missed you.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>Good-night, Ellean.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>[<i>In a low voice, embracing</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon</span>.] I can't thank you.
Dear Mrs. Cortelyon!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_136" name="Page_136">[136]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Her arms round</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span>, <i>in a whisper to</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span>.] Speak a word to
her.</p> <p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Mrs. Cortelyon</span> <i>goes out.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span>.] Ellean, I'm going to see Mrs. Cortelyon home. Tell
Paula where I am; explain, dear.</p> <p class="rdir hang">[<i>Going to the door</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Her head drooping.</i>] Yes. [<i>Quickly.</i>] Father! You are angry with
me—disappointed?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Angry?—no.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Disappointed?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Smiling and going to her and taking her hand.</i>] If so, it's only
because you've shaken my belief in my discernment. I thought you
took after your poor mother a little, Ellean; but there's a look on
your face to-night, dear, that I never saw on hers—never, never.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Leaning her head on his shoulder.</i>] Perhaps I ought not to have
gone away?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_137" name="Page_137">[137]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Hush! You're quite happy?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>That's right. Then, as you are quite happy there is something I
particularly want you to do for me Ellean.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>What is that?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Be very gentle with Paula. Will you?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>You think I have been unkind.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Kissing her upon the forehead.</i>] Be very gentle with Paula.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He goes out and she stands looking after him, then, as she turns
thoughtfully from the door, a rose is thrown through the window and
falls at her feet. She picks up the flower wonderingly and goes to
the window.</i></p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_138" name="Page_138">[138]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Starting back.</i>] Hugh!</p>
<blockquote>
<p class="hang"><span class="smcap">Hugh Ardale</span>, <i>a handsome young man of about seven-and-twenty, with a
boyish face and manner, appears outside the window.</i></p></blockquote>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>Nelly! Nelly dear!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>What's the matter?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>Hush! Nothing. It's only fun. [<i>Laughing.</i>] Ha, ha, ha! I've found
out that Mrs. Cortelyon's meadow runs up to your father's
plantation; I've come through a gap in the hedge.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Why, Hugh?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>I'm miserable at The Warren; it's so different from the Avenue de
Friedland. Don't look like that! Upon my word I meant just to peep
at your home and go back, but I saw figures moving about here, and
came nearer, hoping to get a glimpse of you. Was that your father?</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>Entering the room.</i></p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_139" name="Page_139">[139]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>Isn't this fun! A rabbit ran across my foot while I was hiding
behind that old yew.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>You must go away; it's not right for you to be here like this.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>But it's only fun, I tell you. You take everything so seriously. Do
wish me good-night.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>We have said good-night.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>In the hall at The Warren before Mrs. Cortelyon and a man-servant.
Oh, it's so different from the Avenue de Friedland!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Giving him her hand hastily.</i>] Good-night, Hugh.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>Is that all? We might be the merest acquaintances.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He momentarily embraces her, but she releases herself.</i></p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_140" name="Page_140">[140]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>It's when you're like this that you make me feel utterly miserable.
[<i>Throwing the rose from her angrily.</i>] Oh!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>I've offended you now, I suppose?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>Forgive me, Nelly. Come into the garden for five minutes; we'll
stroll down to the plantation.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>No, no.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>For two minutes—to tell me you forgive me.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>I forgive you.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>Evidently. I sha'n't sleep a wink to-night after this. What a fool I
am! Come down to the plantation. Make it up with me.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>There is somebody coming into this room. Do you wish to be seen
here?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_141" name="Page_141">[141]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>I shall wait for you behind that yew-tree. You must speak to me.
Nelly!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He disappears.</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>enters.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Ellean!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>You—you are very surprised to see me, Paula, of course.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Why are you here? Why aren't you with—your friend?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>I've come home—if you'll have me. We left Paris this morning; Mrs.
Cortelyon brought me back. She was here a minute or two ago; papa
has just gone with her to The Warren. He asked me to tell you.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>There are some people staying with us that I'd rather you didn't
meet. It was hardly worth your while to return for a few hours.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>A few hours?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_142" name="Page_142">[142]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Well, when do you go to London?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>I don't think I go to London, after all.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Eagerly.</i>] You—you've quarrelled with her?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>No, no, no, not that; but—Paula! [<i>In an altered tone.</i>] Paula.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Startled.</i>] Eh? [<span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>goes deliberately to</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>and kisses
her.</i>] Ellean!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Kiss me.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>What—what's come to you?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>I want to behave differently to you in the future. Is it too late?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Too—late! [<i>Impulsively kissing</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>and crying.</i>] No—no—no!
No—no!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_143" name="Page_143">[143]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Paula, don't cry.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Wiping her eyes</i>] I'm a little shaky; I haven't been sleeping.
It's all right,—talk to me.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>There is something I want to tell you——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Is there—is there?</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>They sit together on the ottoman,</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>taking</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean's</span> <i>hand.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Paula, in our house in the Avenue de Friedland, on the floor below
us, there was a Mrs. Brereton. She used to be a friend of my
mother's. Mrs. Cortelyon and I spent a great deal of our time with
her.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Suspiciously.</i>] Oh! [<i>Letting</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean's</span> <i>hand fall.</i>] Is this lady
going to take you up in place of Mrs. Cortelyon?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>No, no. Her brother is staying with her—<i>was</i> staying with her. Her
brother——</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>Breaking off in confusion.</i></p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_144" name="Page_144">[144]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Well?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Almost inaudibly.</i>] Paula——</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>She rises and walks away,</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>following her.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Ellean! [<i>Taking hold of her.</i>] You're not in love!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>looks at</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>appealingly.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh! <i>You</i> in love! You! Oh, this is why you've come home! Of course,
you can make friends with me now! You'll leave us for good soon, I
suppose; so it doesn't much matter being civil to me for a little
while!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Oh, Paula!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Why, how you have deceived us—all of us! We've taken you for a
cold-blooded little saint. The fools you've made of us! Saint
Ellean! Saint Ellean!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Ah, I might have known you'd only mock me!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Her tone changing.</i>] Eh?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_145" name="Page_145">[145]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>I—I can't talk to you. [<i>Sitting on the settee.</i>] You do nothing
else but mock and sneer, nothing else.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Ellean dear! Ellean! I didn't mean it. I'm so horribly jealous, it's
a sort of curse on me. [<i>Kneeling beside</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>and embracing
her.</i>] My tongue runs away with me. I'm going to alter, I swear I
am. I've made some good resolutions, and, as God's above me, I'll
keep them! If you are in love, if you do ever marry, that's no
reason why we shouldn't be fond of each other. Come, you've kissed
me of your own accord—you can't take it back. Now we're friends
again, aren't we? Ellean dear! I want to know everything,
everything. Ellean dear, Ellean!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Paula, Hugh has done something that makes me very angry. He came
with us from Paris to-day, to see papa. He is staying with Mrs.
Cortelyon and—I ought to tell you——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Yes, yes. What?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>He has found his way by The Warren meadow<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_146" name="Page_146">[146]</a></span> through the plantation up
to this house. He is waiting to bid me good-night. [<i>Glancing
towards the garden.</i>] He is—out there.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>What shall I do?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Bring him in to see me! Will you?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>No, no.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>But I'm dying to know him. Oh, yes, you must. I shall meet him
before Aubrey does. [<i>Excitedly running her hands over her hair.</i>]
I'm so glad. [<span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>goes out by the window.</i>] The mirror—mirror.
What a fright I must look! [<i>Not finding the hand-glass on the
table, she jumps on to the settee, and surveys herself in the mirror
over the mantelpiece, then sits quietly down and waits.</i>] Ellean!
Just fancy! Ellean!</p>
<p class="center"><i>After a pause</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>enters by the window with</i> <span class="smcap">Hugh</span>.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Paula, this is Captain Ardale—Mrs. Tanqueray.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_147" name="Page_147">[147]</a></span></p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>risen and turns, and she and</i> <span class="smcap">Hugh</span> <i>stand staring blankly at
each other for a moment or two; then</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>advances and gives him
her hand.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>In a strange voice, but calmly.</i>] How do you do?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>How do you do?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span>.] Mr. Ardale and I have met in London, Ellean.
Er—Captain Ardale, now?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>In London?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>They say the world's very small, don't they?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Ellean, dear, I want to have a little talk about you to Mr.
Ardale—Captain Ardale—alone. [<i>Putting her arms round</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span>,
<i>and leading her to the door.</i>] Come back in a little while. [<span class="smcap">Ellean</span>
<i>nods to</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>with a smile and goes out, while</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>stands
watching her at the open door.</i>] <span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_148" name="Page_148">[148]</a></span>In a little while—in a
little—— [<i>Closing the door and then taking a seat facing</i> <span class="smcap">Hugh</span>.]
Be quick! Mr. Tanqueray has only gone down to The Warren with Mrs.
Cortelyon. What is to be done?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Blankly.</i>] Done?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Done—done. Something must be done.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>I understood that Mr. Tanqueray had married a Mrs.—Mrs.——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Jarman?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I'd been going by that name. You didn't follow my doings after we
separated.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>No.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Sneeringly.</i>] No.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>I went out to India.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>What's to be done?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_149" name="Page_149">[149]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>Damn this chance!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh, my God!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>Your husband doesn't know, does he?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>That you and I——?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>No. He knows about others.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>Not about me. How long were we——?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I don't remember, exactly.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>Do you—do you think it matters?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>His—his daughter. [<i>With a muttered exclamation he turns away and
sits with his head in his hands.</i>] What's to be done?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_150" name="Page_150">[150]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>I wish I could think.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh! Oh! What happened to that flat of ours in Ethelbert Street?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>I let it.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>All that pretty furniture?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>Sold it.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I came across the key of the escritoire the other day in an old
purse! [<i>Suddenly realising the horror and hopelessness of her
position, and starting to her feet with an hysterical cry of rage.</i>]
What am I maundering about?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>For God's sake, be quiet! Do let me think.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>This will send me mad! [<i>Suddenly turning and standing over him.</i>]
You—you beast, to crop up in my life again like this!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>I always treated you fairly.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_151" name="Page_151">[151]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Weakly.</i>] Oh! I beg your pardon—I know you did—I——</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>She sinks on to the settee, crying hysterically.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>Hush!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>She kissed me to-night! I'd won her over! I've had such a fight to
make her love me! And now—just as she's beginning to love me, to
bring this on her!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>Hush, hush! Don't break down!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Sobbing.</i>] You don't know! I—I haven't been getting on well in my
marriage. It's been my fault. The life I used to lead spoilt me
completely. But I'd made up my mind to turn over a new life from
to-night. From to-night!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>Paula——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Don't you call me that!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>Mrs. Tanqueray, there is no cause for you to despair<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_152" name="Page_152">[152]</a></span> in this way.
It's all right, I tell you—it shall be all right.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Shivering.</i>] What are we to do?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>Hold our tongues.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Eh?</p> <p class="rdir hang">[<i>Staring vacantly.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>The chances are a hundred to one against any one ever turning up who
knew us when we were together. Besides, no one would be such a brute
as to split on us. If anybody did do such a thing we should have to
lie! What are we upsetting ourselves like this for, when we've
simply got to hold our tongues?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>You're as mad as I am!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>Can you think of a better plan?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>There's only one plan possible—let's come to our senses!—Mr.
Tanqueray must be told.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_153" name="Page_153">[153]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>Your husband! What, and I lose Ellean! I lose Ellean!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>You've got to lose her.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>I won't lose her! I can't lose her!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Didn't I read of your doing any number of brave things in India?
Why, you seem to be an awful coward!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>That's another sort of pluck altogether; I haven't this sort of
pluck.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh, I don't ask <i>you</i> to tell Mr. Tanqueray. That's my job.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Standing over her.</i>] You—you—you'd better! You——!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Rising.</i>] Don't bully me! I intend to.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Taking hold of her; she wrenches herself free.</i>]<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_154" name="Page_154">[154]</a></span> Look here,
Paula! I never treated you badly—you've owned it. Why should you
want to pay me out like this? You don't know how I love Ellean!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Yes, that's just what I <i>do</i> know.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>I say you don't! She's as good as my own mother. I've been downright
honest with her too. I told her, in Paris, that I'd been a bit wild
at one time, and, after a damned wretched day, she promised to
forgive me because of what I'd done since in India. She's behaved
like an angel to me! Surely I oughtn't to lose her, after all, just
because I've been like other fellows! No; I haven't been half as
rackety as a hundred men we could think of. Paula, don't pay me out
for nothing; be fair to me, there's a good girl—be fair to me!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh, I'm not considering you at all! I advise you not to stay here
any longer; Mr. Tanqueray is sure to be back soon.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Taking up his hat.</i>] What's the understanding between us then?
What have we arranged to do?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_155" name="Page_155">[155]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I don't know what you're going to do; I've got to tell Mr.
Tanqueray.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>By God, you shall do nothing of the sort!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>Approaching her fiercely.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>You shocking coward!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>If you dare! [<i>Going up to the window.</i>] Mind! If you dare!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Following him.</i>] Why, what would you do?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Hugh.</span></p>
<p>[<i>After a short pause, sullenly.</i>] Nothing. I'd shoot myself—that's
nothing. Good-night.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Good-night.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He disappears. She walks unsteadily to the ottoman, and sits; and
as she does so her hand falls upon the little silver mirror, which
she takes up, staring at her own reflection.</i></p>
<hr style="width: 65%;"/>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_156" name="Page_156">[156]</a></span></p>
<h2>THE FOURTH ACT</h2>
<blockquote>
<p class="hang"><i>The Drawing room at "Highercoombe," the same evening.</i></p>
<p class="hang"><span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>is still seated on the ottoman, looking vacantly before her,
with the little mirror in her hand.</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed</span> <i>enters.</i></p></blockquote>
<div class="medskip"> </div>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>There you are! You never came into the billiard-room. Isn't it
maddening—Cayley Drummle gives me sixty out of a hundred and beats
me. I must be out of form, because I know I play remarkably well for
a lady. Only last month—— [<span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>rises.</i>] Whatever is the matter
with you, old girl?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Why?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Staring.</i>] It's the light, I suppose. [<span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>replaces the mirror
on the table.</i>] By Aubrey's bolting<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_157" name="Page_157">[157]</a></span> from the billiard-table in that
fashion I thought perhaps——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Yes; it's all right.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>You've patched it up? [<span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>nods.</i>] Oh, I am jolly glad——! I
mean——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Yes, I know what you mean. Thanks, Mabel.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Kissing</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span>.] Now take my advice; for the future——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Mabel, if I've been disagreeable to you while you've been staying
here, I—I beg your pardon.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>Walking away and sitting down.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>You disagreeable, my dear? I haven't noticed it. Dodo and me both
consider you make a first-class hostess, but then you've had such
practice, haven't you? [<i>Dropping on to the ottoman and gaping.</i>]
Oh, talk about being sleepy——!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Why don't you——!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_158" name="Page_158">[158]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>Why, dear, I must hang about for Dodo. You may as well know it; he's
in one of his moods.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Under her breath.</i>] Oh——!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>Now, it's not his fault; it was deadly dull for him while we were
playing billiards. Cayley Drummle did ask him to mark, but I stopped
that; it's so easy to make a gentleman look like a billiard-marker.
This is just how it always is; if poor old Dodo has nothing to do,
he loses count, as you may say.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Hark!</p>
<blockquote>
<p class="hang"><span class="smcap">Sir George Orreyed</span> <i>enters, walking slowly and deliberately; he
looks pale and watery-eyed.</i></p></blockquote>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Sir George.</span></p>
<p>[<i>With mournful indistinctness.</i>] I'm 'fraid we've lef' you a grea'
deal to yourself to-night, Mrs. Tanqueray. Attra'tions of billiards.
I apol'gise. I say, where's ol' Aubrey?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>My husband has been obliged to go out to a neighbour's house.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_159" name="Page_159">[159]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Sir George.</span></p>
<p>I want his advice on a rather pressing matter connected with my
family—my family. [<i>Sitting.</i>] To-morrow will do just as well.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span>.] This is the mood I hate so—drivelling about his
precious family.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Sir George.</span></p>
<p>The fact is, Mrs. Tanqueray, I am not easy in my min' 'bout the way
I am treatin' my poor ol' mother.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span>.] Do you hear that? That's <i>his</i> mother, but <i>my</i> mother
he won't so much as look at!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Sir George.</span></p>
<p>I shall write to Bruton Street firs' thing in the morning.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span>.] Mamma has stuck to me through everything—well, you
know!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Sir George.</span></p>
<p>I'll get ol' Aubrey to figure out a letter. I'll drop line to Uncle
Fitz too—dooced shame of the ol' feller<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_160" name="Page_160">[160]</a></span> to chuck me over in this
manner. [<i>Wiping his eyes.</i>] All my family have chucked me over.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Rising.</i>] Dodo!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Sir George.</span></p>
<p>Jus' because I've married beneath me, to be chucked over! Aunt
Lydia, the General, Hooky Whitgrave, Lady Sugnall—my own dear
sister!—all turn their backs on me. It's more than I can stan'!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Approaching him with dignity.</i>] Sir George, wish Mrs. Tanqueray
good-night at once and come upstairs. Do you hear me?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Sir George.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Rising angrily.</i>] Wha'——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>Be quiet!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Sir George.</span></p>
<p>You presoom to order me about!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>You're making an exhibition of yourself!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Sir George.</span></p>
<p>Look 'ere——!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_161" name="Page_161">[161]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>Come along, I tell you!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He hesitates, utters a few inarticulate sounds, then snatches up a
fragile ornament from the table, and is about to dash it on to the
ground.</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed</span> <i>retreats, and</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>goes to him.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>George!</p> <p class="rdir hang">[<i>He replaces the ornament.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Sir George.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Shaking</i> <span class="smcap">Paula's</span> <i>hand.</i>] Good ni', Mrs. Tanqueray.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Lady Orreyed.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span>.] Good-night, darling. Wish Aubrey good-night for me.
Now, Dodo?</p> <p class="rdir hang">[<i>She goes out.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Sir George.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span>.] I say, are you goin' to sit up for ol' Aubrey?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Sir George.</span></p>
<p>Shall I keep you comp'ny?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_162" name="Page_162">[162]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>No, thank you, George.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Sir George.</span></p>
<p>Sure?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Yes, sure.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Sir George.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Shaking hands.</i>] Good-night again.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Good-night.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>She turns away. He goes out, steadying himself carefully. Drummle
appears outside the window, smoking.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Looking into the room, and seeing</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span>.] My last cigar. Where's
Aubrey?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Gone down to The Warren, to see Mrs. Cortelyon home.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Entering the room.</i>] Eh? Did you say Mrs. Cortelyon?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_163" name="Page_163">[163]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Yes. She has brought Ellean back.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Bless my soul! Why?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I—I'm too tired to tell you, Cayley. If you stroll along the lane
you'll meet Aubrey. Get the news from him.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Going up to the window.</i>] Yes, yes. [<i>Returning to</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span>.] I
don't want to bother you, only—the anxious old woman, you know. Are
you and Aubrey——?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Good friends again?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Nodding.</i>] Um.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Giving him her hand.</i>] Quite, Cayley, quite.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Retaining her hand.</i>] That's capital. As I'm off so early
to-morrow morning, let me say now—thank you for your hospitality.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He bends over her hand gallantly, then goes out by the window.</i></p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_164" name="Page_164">[164]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To herself.</i>] "Are you and Aubrey——?" "Good friends again?"
"Yes." "Quite, Cayley, quite."</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>There is a brief pause, then</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>enters hurriedly, wearing a
light overcoat and carrying a cap.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Paula dear! Have you seen Ellean?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I found her here when I came down.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>She—she's told you?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Yes, Aubrey.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>It's extraordinary, isn't it! Not that somebody should fall in love
with Ellean or that Ellean herself should fall in love. All that's
natural enough and was bound to happen, I suppose, sooner or later.
But this young fellow! You know his history?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>His history?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_165" name="Page_165">[165]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>You remember the papers were full of his name a few months ago?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh, yes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>The man's as brave as a lion, there's no doubt about that; and, at
the same time, he's like a big good-natured schoolboy, Mrs.
Cortelyon says. Have you ever pictured the kind of man Ellean would
marry some day?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I can't say that I have.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>A grave, sedate fellow I've thought about—hah! She has fallen in
love with the way in which Ardale practically laid down his life to
save those poor people shut up in the Residency. [<i>Taking off his
coat.</i>] Well, I suppose if a man can do that sort of thing, one
ought to be content. And yet—— [<i>Throwing his coat on the
settee.</i>] I should have met him to-night, but he'd gone out. Paula
dear, tell me how you look upon this business.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Yes, I will—I must. To begin with, I—I've seen Mr. Ardale.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_166" name="Page_166">[166]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Captain Ardale?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Captain Ardale.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Seen him?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>While you were away he came up here, through our grounds, to try to
get a word with Ellean. I made her fetch him in and present him to
me.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Frowning.</i>] Doesn't Captain Ardale know there's a lodge and a
front door to this place? Never mind! What is your impression of
him?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Aubrey, do you recollect my bringing you a letter—a letter giving
you an account of myself—to the Albany late one night—the night
before we got married?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>A letter?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>You burnt it; don't you know?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Yes; I know.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_167" name="Page_167">[167]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>His name was in that letter.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Going back from her slowly, and staring at her.</i>] I don't
understand.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Well—Ardale and I once kept house together. [<i>He remains silent,
not moving.</i>] Why don't you strike me? Hit me in the face—I'd
rather you did! Hurt me! hurt me!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>After a pause.</i>] What did you—and this man—say to each
other—just now?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I—hardly—know.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Think!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>The end of it all was that I—I told him I must inform you of—what
had happened ... he didn't want me to do that ... I declared that I
would ... he dared me to. [<i>Breaking down.</i>] Let me alone!—oh!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Where was my daughter while this went on?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_168" name="Page_168">[168]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I—I had sent her out of the room ... that is all right.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Yes, yes—yes, yes.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He turns his head towards the door.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Who's that?</p>
<p class="center"><i>A</i> <span class="smcap">Servant</span> <i>enters with a letter.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Servant.</span></p>
<p>The coachman has just run up with this from The Warren, sir. [<span class="smcap">Aubrey</span>
<i>takes the letter.</i>] It's for Mrs. Tanqueray, sir; there's no
answer.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>The</i> <span class="smcap">Servant</span> <i>withdraws.</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>goes to</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>and drops the
letter into her lap; she opens it with uncertain hands.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Reading it to herself.</i>] It's from—him. He's going away—or
gone—I think. [<i>Rising in a weak way.</i>] What does it say? I never
could make out his writing.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>She gives the letter to</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>and stands near him, looking at
the letter over his shoulder as he reads.</i></p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_169" name="Page_169">[169]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Reading.</i>] "I shall be in Paris by to-morrow evening. Shall wait
there, at Meurice's, for a week, ready to receive any communication
you or your husband may address to me. Please invent some
explanation to Ellean. Mrs. Tanqueray, for God's sake, do what you
can for me."</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>speak in low voices, both still looking at the
letter.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Has he left The Warren, I wonder, already?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>That doesn't matter.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>No, but I can picture him going quietly off. Very likely he's
walking on to Bridgeford or Cottering to-night, to get the first
train in the morning. A pleasant stroll for him.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>We'll reckon he's gone, that's enough.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>That isn't to be answered in any way?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_170" name="Page_170">[170]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Silence will answer that.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>He'll soon recover his spirits, I know.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>You know. [<i>Offering her the letter.</i>] You don't want this, I
suppose?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>No.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>It's done with—done with.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He tears the letter into small pieces. She has dropped the
envelope; she searches for it, finds it, and gives it to him.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Here!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Looking at the remnants of the letter.</i>] This is no good; I must
burn it.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Burn it in your room.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Put it in your pocket for now.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_171" name="Page_171">[171]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He does so.</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>enters and they both turn, guiltily, and
stare at her.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>[<i>After a short silence, wonderingly.</i>] Papa——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>What do you want, Ellean?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>I heard from Willis that you had come in; I only want to wish you
good-night. [<span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>steals away, without looking back.</i>] What's the
matter? Ah! Of course, Paula has told you about Captain Ardale?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Well?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Have you and he met?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>No.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>You are angry with him; so was I. But to-morrow when he calls and
expresses his regret—to-morrow—<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_172" name="Page_172">[172]</a></span>—</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Ellean—Ellean!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Yes, papa?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I—I can't let you see this man again. [<i>He walks away from her in a
paroxysm of distress, then, after a moment or two, he returns to her
and takes her to his arms.</i>] Ellean! my child!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Releasing herself.</i>] What has happened, papa? What is it?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Thinking out his words deliberately.</i>] Something has occurred,
something has come to my knowledge, in relation to Captain Ardale,
which puts any further acquaintanceship between you two out of the
question.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Any further acquaintanceship ... out of the question?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>Advancing to her quickly, but she shrinks from him.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>No, no—I am quite well. [<i>After a short pause.</i>]<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_173" name="Page_173">[173]</a></span> It's not an hour
ago since Mrs. Cortelyon left you and me together here; you had
nothing to urge against Captain Ardale then.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>No.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>You don't know each other; you haven't even seen him this evening.
Father!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I have told you he and I have not met.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Mrs. Cortelyon couldn't have spoken against him to you just now. No,
no, no; she's too good a friend to both of us. Aren't you going to
give me some explanation? You can't take this position towards
me—towards Captain Ardale—without affording me the fullest
explanation.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Ellean, there are circumstances connected with Captain Ardale's
career which you had better remain ignorant of. It must be
sufficient for you that I consider these circumstances render him
unfit to be your husband.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Father!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_174" name="Page_174">[174]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>You must trust me, Ellean; you must try to understand the depth of
my love for you and the—the agony it gives me to hurt you. You must
trust me.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>I will, father; but you must trust me a little too. Circumstances
connected with Captain Ardale's career?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>When he presents himself here to-morrow of course you will see him
and let him defend himself?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Captain Ardale will not be here to-morrow.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Not! You have stopped his coming here?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Indirectly—yes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>But just now he was talking to me at that window! Nothing had taken
place then! And since then nothing can have——! Oh! Why—you have
heard something against him from Paula.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_175" name="Page_175">[175]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>From—Paula!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>She knows him.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>She has told you so?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>When I introduced Captain Ardale to her she said she had met him in
London. Of course! It is Paula who has done this!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>In a hard voice.</i>] I—I hope you—you'll refrain from rushing at
conclusions. There's nothing to be gained by trying to avoid the
main point, which is that you must drive Captain Ardale out of your
thoughts. Understand that! You're able to obtain comfort from your
religion, aren't you? I'm glad to think that's so. I talk to you in
a harsh way, Ellean, but I feel your pain almost as acutely as you
do. [<i>Going to the door.</i>] I—I can't say anything more to you
to-night.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Father! [<i>He pauses at the door.</i>] Father, I'm obliged to ask you
this; there's no help for it—I've no mother to go to. Does what you
have heard<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_176" name="Page_176">[176]</a></span> about Captain Ardale concern the time when he led a
wild, a dissolute life in London?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Returning to her slowly and staring at her.</i>] Explain yourself!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>He has been quite honest with me. One day—in Paris—he confessed to
me—what a man's life is—what his life had been.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Under his breath.</i>] Oh!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>He offered to go away, not to approach me again.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>And you—you accepted his view of what a man's life is!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>As far as <i>I</i> could forgive him, I forgave him.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>With a groan.</i>] Why, when was it you left us? It hasn't taken you
long to get your robe "just a little dusty at the hem!"<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_177" name="Page_177">[177]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>What do you mean?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Hah! A few weeks ago my one great desire was to keep you ignorant of
evil.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Father, it is impossible to be ignorant of evil. Instinct, common
instinct, teaches us what is good and bad. Surely I am none the
worse for knowing what is wicked and detesting it!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Detesting it! Why, you love this fellow!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Ah, you don't understand! I have simply judged Captain Ardale as we
all pray to be judged. I have lived in imagination through that one
week in India when he deliberately offered his life back to God to
save those wretched, desperate people. In his whole career I see now
nothing but that one week; those few hours bring him nearer the
Saints, I believe, than fifty uneventful years of mere blamelessness
would have done! And so, father, if Paula has reported anything to
Captain Ardale's discredit—<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_178" name="Page_178">[178]</a></span>—</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Paula——!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>It must be Paula; it can't be anybody else.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>You—you'll please keep Paula out of the question. Finally, Ellean,
understand me—I have made up my mind.</p> <p class="rdir hang">[<i>Again going to the door.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>But wait—listen! I have made up my mind also.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Ah! I recognise your mother in you now!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>You need not speak against my mother because you are angry with me!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I—I hardly know what I'm saying to you. In the morning—in the
morning——</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He goes out. She remains standing, and turns her head to listen.
Then, after a moment's hesitation she goes softly to the window, and
looks out under the verandah.</i></p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_179" name="Page_179">[179]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>[<i>In a whisper.</i>] Paula! Paula!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>appears outside the window and steps into the room; her face
is white and drawn, her hair is a little disordered.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Huskily.</i>] Well?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Have you been under the verandah all the while—listening?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>N—no.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>You <i>have</i> overheard us—I see you have. And it <i>is</i> you who have
been speaking to my father against Captain Ardale. Isn't it? Paula,
why don't you own it or deny it?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh, I—I don't mind owning it; why should I?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Ah! You seem to have been very very eager to tell your tale.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>No, I wasn't eager, Ellean. I'd have given something not to have had
to do it. I wasn't eager.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_180" name="Page_180">[180]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Not! Oh, I think you might safely have spared us all for a little
while.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>But, Ellean, you forget I—I am your step-mother. It was my—my
duty—to tell your father what I—what I knew——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>What you knew! Why, after all, what can you know! You can only speak
from gossip, report, hearsay! How is it possible that you——! [<i>She
stops abruptly. The two women stand staring at each other for a
moment; then</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>backs away from</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>slowly.</i>] Paula!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>What—what's the matter?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>You—you knew Captain Ardale in London!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Why—what do you mean?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Oh!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>She makes for the door, but</i> <span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>catches her by the wrist.</i></p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_181" name="Page_181">[181]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>You shall tell me what you mean!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Ah! [<i>Suddenly looking fixedly in</i> <span class="smcap">Paula's</span> <i>face.</i>] You know what I
mean.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>You accuse me!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>It's in your face!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Hoarsely.</i>] You—you think I'm—that sort of creature, do you?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Let me go!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Answer me! You've always hated me! [<i>Shaking her.</i>] Out with it!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>You hurt me!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>You've always hated me! You shall answer me!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Well, then, I have always—always——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>What?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_182" name="Page_182">[182]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>I have always known what you were!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Ah! Who—who told you?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Nobody but yourself. From the first moment I saw you I knew you were
altogether unlike the good women I'd left; directly I saw you I knew
what my father had done. You've wondered why I've turned from you!
There—that's the reason! Oh, but this is a horrible way for the
truth to come home to every one! Oh!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>It's a lie! It's all a lie! [<i>Forcing</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>down upon her
knees.</i>] You shall beg my pardon for it. [<i>Ellean utters a loud
shriek of terror.</i>] Ellean, I'm a good woman! I swear I am! I've
always been a good woman! You dare to say I've ever been anything
else! It's a lie!</p> <p class="rdir hang">[<i>Throwing her off violently.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>re-enters.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Paula! [<span class="smcap">Paula</span> <i>staggers back as</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>advances. Raising</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span>.]
What's this? What's this?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_183" name="Page_183">[183]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Faintly.</i>] Nothing. It—it's my fault. Father, I—I don't wish to
see Captain Ardale again.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>She goes out,</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>slowly following her to the door.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Aubrey, she—she guesses.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Guesses?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>About me—and Ardale.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>About you—and Ardale?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>She says she suspected my character from the beginning ... that's
why she's always kept me at a distance ... and now she sees
through——</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>She falters; he helps her to the ottoman, where she sits.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Bending over her.</i>] Paula, you must have said something—admitted
something——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I don't think so. It—it's in my face.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_184" name="Page_184">[184]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>What?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>She tells me so. She's right! I'm tainted through and through;
anybody can see it, anybody can find it out. You said much the same
to me to-night.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>If she has got this idea into her head we must drive it out, that's
all. We must take steps to—— What shall we do? We had
better—better——What—what?</p> <p class="rdir hang">[<i>Sitting and staring before him.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Ellean! So meek, so demure! You've often said she reminded you of
her mother. Yes, I know now what your first marriage was like.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>We must drive this idea out of her head. We'll do something. What
shall we do?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>She's a regular woman too. She could forgive <i>him</i> easily
enough—but <i>me</i>! That's just a woman!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>What <i>can</i> we do?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_185" name="Page_185">[185]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Why, nothing! She'd have no difficulty in following up her
suspicions. Suspicions! You should have seen how she looked at me!
[<i>He buries his head in his hands. There is silence for a time, then
she rises slowly, and goes and sits beside him.</i>] Aubrey!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Yes.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I'm very sorry.</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>Without meeting her eyes, he lays his hand on her arm for a
moment.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Well, we must look things straight in the face. [<i>Glancing round.</i>]
At any rate, we've done with this.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I suppose so. [<i>After a brief pause.</i>] Of course, she and I can't
live under the same roof any more. You know she kissed me to-night,
of her own accord.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I asked her to alter towards you.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>That was it, then.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_186" name="Page_186">[186]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I—I'm sorry I sent her away.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>It was my fault; I made it necessary.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Perhaps now she'll propose to return to the convent,—well, she
must.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Would you like to keep her with you and—and leave me?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Paula——!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>You needn't be afraid I'd go back to—what I was. I couldn't.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Sssh, for God's sake! We—you and I—we'll get out of this place ...
what a fool I was to come here again!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>You lived here with your first wife!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>We'll get out of this place and go abroad again, and begin afresh.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_187" name="Page_187">[187]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Begin afresh?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>There's no reason why the future shouldn't be happy for us—no
reason that I can see——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Aubrey!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Yes?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>You'll never forget this, you know.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>This?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>To-night, and everything that's led up to it. Our coming here,
Ellean, our quarrels—cat and dog!—Mrs. Cortelyon, the Orreyeds,
this man! What an everlasting nightmare for you!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Oh, we can forget it, if we choose.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>That was always your cry. How <i>can</i> one do it!<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_188" name="Page_188">[188]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Well make our calculations solely for the future, talk about the
future, think about the future.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>I believe the future is only the past again, entered through another
gate.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>That's an awful belief.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>To-night proves it. You must see now that, do what we will, go where
we will, you'll be continually reminded of—what I was. I see it.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>You're frightened to-night; meeting this man has frightened you. But
that sort of thing isn't likely to recur. The world isn't quite so
small as all that.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Isn't it! The only great distances it contains are those we carry
within ourselves—the distances that separate husbands and wives,
for instance. And so it'll be with us. You'll do your best—oh, I
know that—you're a good fellow. But circumstances will be too
strong for you in the end, mark my words.<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_189" name="Page_189">[189]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Paula——!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Of course I'm pretty now—I'm pretty still—and a pretty woman,
whatever else she may be, is always—well, endurable. But even now I
notice that the lines of my face are getting deeper; so are the
hollows about my eyes. Yes, my face is covered with little shadows
that usen't to be there. Oh, I know I'm "going off." I hate paint
and dye and those messes, but, by-and-by, I shall drift the way of
the others; I sha'n't he able to help myself. And then, some
day—perhaps very suddenly, under a queer, fantastic light at night
or in the glare of the morning—that horrid, irresistible truth that
physical repulsion forces on men and women will come to you, and
you'll sicken at me.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>I——!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>You'll see me then, at last, with other people's eyes; you'll see me
just as your daughter does now, as all wholesome folks see women
like me. And I shall have no weapon to fight with—not one
serviceable little bit of prettiness left me to defend myself with!
A worn-out creature—broken up, very likely,<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_190" name="Page_190">[190]</a></span> some time before I
ought to be—my hair bright, my eyes dull, my body too thin or too
stout, my cheeks raddled and ruddled—a ghost, a wreck, a
caricature, a candle that gutters, call such an end what you like!
Oh, Aubrey, what shall I be able to say to you then? And this is the
future you talk about! I know it—I know it! [<i>He is still sitting
staring forward; she rocks herself to and fro as if in pain.</i>] Oh,
Aubrey! Oh! Oh!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Paula——!</p> <p class="rdir hang">[<i>Trying to comfort her.</i></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Paula.</span></p>
<p>Oh, and I wanted so much to sleep to-night! [<i>Laying her head upon
his shoulder. From the distance, in the garden, there comes the
sound of</i> <span class="smcap">Drummle's</span> <i>voice; he is singing as he approaches the
house.</i>] That's Cayley, coming back from The Warren. [<i>Starting
up.</i>] He doesn't know, evidently. I—I won't see him!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>She goes out quickly.</i> <span class="smcap">Drummle's</span> <i>voice comes nearer.</i> <span class="smcap">Aubrey</span>
<i>rouses himself and snatches up a book from the table, making a
pretence of reading. After a moment or two,</i> <span class="smcap">Drummle</span> <i>appears at the
window and looks in.</i></p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_191" name="Page_191">[191]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Aha! my dear chap!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Cayley?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Coming into the room.</i>] I went down to The Warren after you?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Yes?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Missed you. Well? I've been gossiping with Mrs. Cortelyon. Confound
you, I've heard the news!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>What have you heard?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>What have I heard! Why—Ellean and young Ardale! [<i>Looking at</i>
<span class="smcap">Aubrey</span> <i>keenly.</i>] My dear Aubrey! Alice is under the impression that
you are inclined to look on the affair favourably.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Rising and advancing to</i> <span class="smcap">Drummle</span>.] You've not—met—Captain
Ardale?<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_192" name="Page_192">[192]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>No. Why do you ask? By-the-bye, I don't know that I need tell
you—but it's rather strange. He's not at The Warren to-night.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>No?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>He left the house half-an-hour ago, to stroll about the lanes; just
now a note came from him, a scribble in pencil, simply telling Alice
that she would receive a letter from him to-morrow. What's the
matter? There's nothing very wrong, is there! My dear chap, pray
forgive me if I'm asking too much.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Cayley, you—you urged me to send her away!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Ellean! Yes, yes. But—but—by all accounts this is quite an
eligible young fellow. Alice has been giving me the history——</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Curse him! [<i>Hurling his book to the floor.</i>] Curse him! Yes, I do
curse him—him and his class! Perhaps I curse myself too in doing
it. He has only led "a man's life"—just as I, how many of us, have<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_193" name="Page_193">[193]</a></span>
done! The misery he has brought on me and mine it's likely enough
we, in our time, have helped to bring on others by this leading "a
man's life"! But I do curse him for all that. My God, <i>I've</i> nothing
more to fear—I've paid <i>my</i> fine! And so I can curse him in safety.
Curse him! Curse him!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>In Heaven's name, tell me what's happened?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>[<i>Gripping</i> <span class="smcap">Drummle</span>'s <i>arm.</i>] Paula! Paula!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>What?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>They met to-night here. They—they—they're not strangers to each
other.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>Aubrey!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Curse him! My poor, wretched wife! My poor, wretched wife!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>The door opens and</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>appears. The two men turn to her.
There is a moment's silence.</i></p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_194" name="Page_194">[194]</a></span></p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Father ... father...!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Aubrey.</span></p>
<p>Ellean?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>I—I want you. [<i>He goes to her.</i>] Father ... go to Paula! [<i>He
looks into her face, startled.</i>] Quickly—quickly! [<i>He passes her
to go out, she seizes his arm, with a cry.</i>] No, no; don't go!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>He shakes her off and goes.</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span> <i>staggers back towards</i>
<span class="smcap">Drummle</span>.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Ellean</span>.] What do you mean? What do you mean?</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>I—I went to her room—to tell her I was sorry for something I had
said to her. And I <i>was</i> sorry—I <i>was</i> sorry. I heard the fall.
I—I've seen her. It's horrible.</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Drummle.</span></p>
<p>She—she has——!</p>
<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Ellean.</span></p>
<p>Killed—herself? Yes—yes. So everybody will<span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_195" name="Page_195">[195]</a></span> say. But I know—I
helped to kill her. If I had only been merciful!</p>
<p class="rdir hang">[<i>She faints upon the ottoman. He pauses for a moment
irresolutely—then he goes to the door, opens it, and stands looking
out.</i></p>
